This theme takes on all the possible justice issues, social equity, multiculturalism, environment activism, advocacy
planning, etc. There are several acts that began in 1965 and 2015 is 50 years later...
The 1960s was a time in history where growth and development was rampant around the globe. Focus began to fall on
urban renewal and the health of the environment as well as the  impact associated with human activities.
The sixties brought about civil rights movements globally and especially here in the United States. As freedom riders made
their journey across the south in 1961 protesting the use of segregation in public transportation, urban_planning was
progressing by introducing zoning for the first time in the state of Hawaii. The year of 1964 brought about the enactment of
the civil rights act that banned discrimination based on "race, color, religion, sex or national origin" in employment
practices and public accommodations. 1964 was also the year that economic development was brought into the spotlight
by President Lyndon Johnson declaring war on poverty. The civil rights movement was hit hard in 1968 due to the
assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. in Memphis, Tennessee. Despite this tragedy, regional planning was evolving and
the Intergovernmental Relations Act of 1968 was passed, requiring state and sub-state regional clearinghouses to review
and comment on federally assisted projects to facilitate coordination among the three levels of government.
Starting in the 1960s, the beginning of the women's rights movement resurged forward after being passive during the
1940s and 1950s. The civil rights protests spurred the women of the 1960s to renew the push for equal rights for women as
well as minorities in educational and employment fields. Equality in politics, both in the United States and internationally,
were also on the agenda for women's rights. During this time of women's rights movements, Jane Jacobs made her mark in
planning by introducing "The Death and Life of Great American city" into the planning profession.
The world became increasingly conscious about the health of the environment during this time in history. In 1960, the first
clean water act was passed by Congress as well as the first implementation of a Public Health Service study on air pollution
from cars. The end of the sixties brought one of environment health's most influential accomplishments, the passing of
the National environment Policy Act by Congress.
The 1960s will forever be known as a time of progress. Fifty years later we will look back to assess the progress we have
made from the groundwork established in the 60s as we plan for the development that will take place in the next fifty
years.

Notes about this book
Abstract Index # and Abstract System ID #:
When submitted to the abstract management system, each abstract is assigned a system ID number for administrative
search/find purposes. When abstracts are pulled from the system to create this Book, they are assigned index numbers
because the data pull of abstracts is automatically sorted by track, and ultimately you need a method of searching for
authors if you happen to print the book. Separate indexes for Author Names and Keywords reference the Abstract Index #.
Both assigned numbers are listed for each abstract.
Order of Authors:
The abstract management system created for ACSP allows for author role declaration, as well as ordering of authors.
Authors here and in the final program will be indicated as primary and/or presenting authors of the paper. If there is only
one author of a paper, you can assume this individual is the primary and presenting author. Other authors are co-authors
with no designation. All roundtable participants are considered presenters and so do not receive a designation with the
exception of the moderator and/or organizer of the session. The individual who submitted the abstract created the order of
authors.
Multiple Program Placement Policy:
Multiple abstract submissions on behalf of one author will be reviewed and may possibly be accepted and included in this
publication. However, more than one presentation of a formal paper and more than one appearance as a roundtable
participant during the conference will not be allowed. It is, however, possible to present both a poster and a paper, if both
proposals are accepted. Participants on the final program will be limited to: one presentation of an individual paper
whether in a formal paper session or involved in a pre-organized formal paper session; one placement on a roundtable; one
placement as a discussant of a formal paper session; and one placement in the poster session. These roles are not
interchangeable. If you have more than one submitted paper abstract accepted and are invited to participate on more than
one accepted roundtable, in fairness to everyone, we will ask you to limit your participation.
Requests for Edits:
All abstracts are unedited and published as submitted by the author(s) for peer review. This document will not be edited.
Any necessary changes for the final program should be sent to ddodd@acsp.org.
Search Key
This document is 845 pages long including the Author Index and Key Word Index. In order to get somewhere quickly, copy
and paste these titles in the search box, or use the indexes and search for the Abstract Index # provided:
Abstract Index #: <insert #>
Abstract System ID#: <insert #>
Track 1
Track 2
Track 3
Track 4
Track 5
Track 6
Track 7
Track 8

Track 9
Track 10
Track 11
Track 12
Track 13
Track 14
Track 15
Author Index
Key Word Index

Track 1: Analytical Methods and Computer Applications
Abstract Index #: 1
READY, SET, ACTION: USING ACTIVE LIFESTYLE CAMERAS IN PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 4
Individual Paper
COWLEY, Jennifer [The Ohio State University] cowley.11@osu.edu, presenting author, primary author
MCREE, Annie-Laurie [Ohio State University] mcree.1@osu.edu
There has been a vast improvement in technology, with ready availability of active lifestyle video cameras. These
cameras are intended to capture in motion activities, such as bicycling, skiing, or motorbiking. One result of these
cameras is a series of viral videos showing the challenges of cycling - for example Casey Neidstat’s video, with
more than 13 million views, about getting a ticket for not riding in the bike lane and Neidstat’s demonstration of
obstacles in the roadway for cyclists (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bzE-IMaegzQ). This study
demonstrates how active lifestyle cameras can be used to capture and share video from the point of view of a
bicyclist. Distances are calibrated by taking video footage of marks on the ground at distances from one to ten
feet away in one foot increments. This study measures a series of multimodal interactions during bicycle
commuting trips, between February and April 2015. Bicyclists will capture video footage of bicycle commuting
trips, traveling to and from the Ohio State University. The footage will be analyzed to determine for example, the
distance between overtaking motor vehicles and cyclists. Using calibration footage, a transparency placed on a
computer screen is used to create a ruler to measure the position of objects in relation to the bicycle. Model
variables will include cyclist demographic characteristics, lane width, bicycle infrastructure, roadway
characteristics, and behaviors of bicyclists, motorists, and pedestrians. This paper demonstrates how active
motion cameras can be used to capture data, resulting in the ability to measure and analyze multimodal
interactions.
References
 Harket, D.L. and J.R. Steward. (1997). Evaluation of shared-use facilities for bicycles and motor vehicles.
Transportation Research Record: Journal of Transportation Research Board. 1578. 111-118.
 Love, D. C., Breaud, A., Burns, S., Margulies, J., Romano, M., & Lawrence, R. (2012). Is the three-foot
bicycle passing law working in Baltimore, Maryland? Accident Analysis & Prevention, 48, 451-456.
 Parkin, J., & Meyers, C. (2010). The effect of cycle lanes on the proximity between motor traffic and cycle
traffic. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 42(1), 159-165.
 Kroll, B. and M.R. Ramey. (1977) Effects of bike lanes on driver and bicyclists behavior. Journal of
Transportation Engineering. 103(2). 243-256.
 Kroll, B. and R. Sommer. (1976). Bicyclists response to urban bikeways. Journal of the American Institute
of Planners. 42-51.

Abstract Index #: 2
FORECASTING DECLINE: USING THE LAND TRANSFORMATION MODEL TO PREDICT VACANT LAND
Abstract System ID#: 115
Individual Paper
LEE, Jaekyung [Texas A&M University] jklee1127@gmail.com, presenting author, primary author
NEWMAN, Galen [Texas A&M University] gnewman@arch.tamu.edu
Cities globally are experiencing capacious increases in vacant land. Vacant and abandoned spaces in city are
mounting rapidly, creating a vast problematic landscape for planners and designers. The process of urbanization

is characterized by cycles of  land_use obsolescence and activation, primarily influenced by population alterations.
For example, from 2000 to 2010, the total number of vacant housing units in America increased by over 4.5
million, an escalation of 44%. As urban populations fluctuate, holes can open up in once tight area, resulting in
vacant land accumulation. Simultaneously, as city expand outward, they leave in their wake vacant land,
derelict land, and building stock no longer for their original purposes.
Previous research suggests that spatial solutions, such as more accurate and proactive  land_use planning
mechanisms, may be more effective than policy in dealing with the vacancy issue. Ironically, most solutions to
vacancy are dependent upon return on investment, the same process which typically creates the condition. More
recently,  land_use/land cover (LUCC) prediction models have emerged as a proactive attempt to gauge future
urban  land_use changes. The rise in technological tools has increased the reliability of LUCC models, leading to a
rise in popularity. They now help provide data for impact assessments, parameterizing urban changes processes,
developing forecasts of future situations, and simulating policy scenarios.
 land_use science is evolving and becoming more technologically driven. The use of computer-based models of
 land_use change and urban growth has greatly increased. Digital models of LUCC have become powerful tools to
help understand and analyze important connections between socio-economic processes and urban processes.
Current research uses these models to support analyses of both causes and consequences of  land_use dynamics.
While great strides have been made in the development of  land_use forecasting methods, unfortunately, no
singular model has been employed which specifically targets the global urban vacant land epidemic. There is an
urgent need for new urban models which explore current problems such as the vacancy issue, if we are to
reverse symptoms of urban decline. Current LUCC models are typically used to predict broad  land_uses and/or
transportation changes and most predict urban growth, not decline. This research begins the process of testing
LUCC models and their effectiveness in predicting future urban vacancies using the Land Transformation Model
(LTM), an artificial neural networking mechanism in Geographic Information system (GIS). It is a prediction tool
developed by Purdue University designed to simulate and predict urban  land_use change based on statistical
techniques which compute  land_use change probabilities.
The LTM uses input patterns (historical raster inventories of  land_uses) and input factors (raster data sets for
variables contributing to change) to forecast future conditions. Its accuracy in predicting vacant land conditions is
tested through comparisons of the model’s predicted vacancies to actual vacancy occurrences, using time-series
data from 1990-2010 in Fort Worth, Texas. Evaluation of the LTM’s accuracy is based on a three-tiered process: 1)
comparisons of actual vacancy rates to predicted vacancy rates using 5 year input patterns but differing amounts
input factors, 2) examination of LTM based output statistics and 3) assessment of output similarities for predicted
vacant land for the year 2020 using differing input patterns but identical input factors. The test of the LUCC
model in this study had mixed results. There was an acceptable level of accuracy in outputs compared to other
studies but the model still has several limitations that need to be addressed before it can be more widely utilized
to predict decline, not growth. This will allow for more proactive decisions to better regulate the process of urban
regeneration.
References
 Pijanowski, Bryan C., Tayyebi, Amin, Doucette, Jarrod, Pekin, Burak K., Braun, David, & Plourde, James.
(2014). A Big Data Urban Growth Simulation at a National Scale: Configuring the GIS and Neural Network
Based Land Transformation Model to Run in A High Performance Computing (HPC) Environment.
Environmental Modelling & Software, 51, 250-268.
 Mallach, Alan. (2012). Laying the Groundwork for Change: Demolition, Urban Strategy, and Policy
Reform. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
 Park, In Kwon, & Rabenau, Burkhard von. (2014). Tax Delinquency and Abandonment: An Expanded
Model with Application to Industrial and Commercial Properties. Urban Studies. DOI:
0042098014524610.
 Landis, John D. (2011). Urban Growth Models: State of the Art and Prospects. Global Urbanization, 126140.



Almeida, C. M., Gleriani, J. M., Castejon, Emiliano Ferreira, & Soares‐Filho, B. S. (2008). Using Neural
Networks and Cellular Automata for Modelling Intra‐Urban Land‐Use Dynamics. International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 22(9), 943-963.

Abstract Index #: 3
EVALUATING INTERNET-BASED PUBLIC PARTICIPATION GIS AND VOLUNTEERED GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION
FOR environment PLANNING AND MANAGEMENT
Abstract System ID#: 196
Individual Paper
LIU, Tiantian [University of Nebraska-Lincoln] liutt2010@aliyun.com
Public participation is a vital part of collaborative environment management and planning. While our society is
rapidly moving towards digital communications, with the development of the Social Web (Web 2.0) and the
pervasiveness of personal computers and mobile devices (e.g., smart phones and tablets), the Internet-based
communication platform has emerged as a key channel for public participation. An Internet-based Public
Participation Geographic Information System (PPGIS) is an affordable and accessible tool for citizens to provide
location-based Volunteered Geographic Information (VGI) in environment management. Based on a conceptual
model, this study uses the SWOT (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats) analysis methodology to
qualitatively evaluate user, information, and site use of six cases with Internet-based PPGIS. This study reviews
each case’s website to collect descriptive data for the case analysis. The results of this study show that user
numbers do not have a significantly strong relationship with data submission numbers, since active users had the
highest number of contributions. The most urgent task of using Internet-based PPGIS to attract citizen scientists
is to invite and retain long-term and active contributors, and to change interested users into long-term active
contributors.
References
 Atzmanstorfer, K., Resl, R., Eitzinger A., Izurieta, X. (2014) The GeoCitizen-approach: community-based
spatial planning – an Ecuadorian case study. Cartography and Geographic Information Science 41(3):
248-259.
 Berry, R., Higgs, G., Fry, R., Langford, M. (2011) Web-based GIS approaches to enhance public
participation in wind farm planning. Transaction in GIS 15(2): 147-172.
 Brown, G., Donovan, S. (2014). Measuring change in place values for environment
 and natural resource planning using Public Participation GIS (PPGIS): results and challenges for
longitudinal research. Society & Natural Resources 27(1): 36-54.
 Brown, G., Weber, D. (2011). Public participation GIS: a new method for use in national park planning.
Landscape and urban_planning 102(1): 1-15.

Abstract Index #: 4
INTEGRATING environment DATASETS AND CITIZEN SCIENCE FOR environment PLANNING: LEARNED
FROM THE PIONEERING MOBILE INFORMATION PLATFORMS
Abstract System ID#: 197
Individual Paper
TANG, Zhenghong [University of Nebraska - Lincoln] ztang2@unl.edu
Information channel is dramatically shifting from web-based information platform to mobile platform. However,
scientific environment datasets are increasingly becoming more complex and larger. Users have limited options
and skills to smoothly access the geospatial environment data through mobile devices. Planners and citizens
have to rely on traditional devices (e.g. GPS unit) or specific software (e.g. GIS) to access these environment
datasets, including Soil Survey Geographic database (SSURGO), Flood Insurance Rate map (FIRM), National
Wetland Inventory (NWI), water quality dataset (STORET). Most of the environment datasets are still in one-

way top-down communication style. This project conduct case studies to analyze the site condition, user
contribution, and information distribution of the pioneering, scientific-based, environment-oriented, mobile
information platforms in the United States, including the CoCoRaHS, What’s Invasive!, eBird, OakMapper, Field
Photo, Leafsnap, and Nebraska Wetland projects. Through analyze the sites, users and information on these
mobile information platforms, the results indicate that long-term active users are the major contributors to
reporting grassroots environment information to the scientific datasets. Lack of motivation and long-term
resources commitments are the major challenges in citizen science projects. A successful environment project
need to incorporate both online and off-line activities with professional networks. Data quality and verification is
the uncertain and needs more attentions in citizen science projects. The findings of this study provide insightful
recommendations to further development of mobile information platform and citizen engagement for
environmental planning and management.
References
 Connors, J. P., Lei, S., and Kelly, M. 2012. Citizen Science in the Age of Neogeography: Utilizing
Volunteered Geographic Information for environment Monitoring, Annals of the Association of
American Geographers, 102(X): 1-23.
 Devictor, V., Whittaker, R.J., Beltrame, C. 2010. Beyond scarcity: citizen science programmes as useful
tools for conservation biogeography, Diversity and Distributions 16: 354-362.
 Goodchild, M. F., and Glennon, J. 2010. Crowdsourcing geographic information for disaster response: a
research frontier. International Journal of Digital Earth, Vol.3, No.3, 231-241.
 McCall, M.K., 2003, Seeking good governance in participatory-GIS: a review of processes and governance
dimensions in applying GIS to participatory spatial planning, Habitat International 27: 549–573.
 Werts, J.D., Mikhailova, E.A., Post, C.J., Sharp, J.L. 2012. An integrated WebGIS framework for
volunteered geographic information and social media in soil and water conservation, environment
Management 49: 816-832.

Abstract Index #: 5
THE USEFULNESS OF ONLINE PARTICIPATORY TOOLS IN PLAN MAKING
Abstract System ID#: 215
Individual Paper
AFZALAN, Nader [University of Colorado Boulder/ Denver] nader.afzalan@colorado.edu
Local governments and planning organizations are increasingly using Online Participatory Tools (OPTs) for
engaging citizens in plan-making processes. However, our understanding of whether and how planners find these
tools useful in these processes is still limited. The current literature falls short in understanding how the
capacities of planning organizations and online participatory tools influence the tool incorporation and usefulness
in plan-making processes.
In this study, I examined the usability of online participatory tools in plan-making processes through exploring
planners’ perspectives. In particular, I asked the following two questions: (a) How and why planners use Online
Participatory Tools (OPTs) in plan making?; and (b) What factors affect planners’ satisfaction of using OPTs in plan
making and how? The following theories informed my research: participatory planning theories are used to
define criteria for exploring the purposes and methods of using new participatory methods (Evans-Cowley &
Manta Conroy, 2006; Forester, 1989; Innes & Booher, 2010), organization theories helped with defining
organizational factors that influence technology adoption (DeSanctis & Poole, 1994; Flyvbjerg, 2006), and
planning support system theories helped with defining factors that influence the capacities of new technologies
in facilitating information sharing and social interaction (Klosterman & Pettit, 2005).
I surveyed 106 planners (58% response rate) to explore the stages and purposes that the tools are used for, the
ways in which the tools are integrated with other participatory methods, the results of using the tool, and the
level of satisfaction with using the tool. In addition, I interviewed 44 of the planners, who participated in the
survey, for more detailed exploration of how and why they used Online Participatory Tools (OPTs) in plan-making.

Using archival research, the participant planners were selected based on the following criteria: the planners
should have used one of the three OPTs (MindMixer, PlaceSpeak, Shareabouts) in one plan; the plan should have
passed at least the visioning stage; the plan scale should have not been larger than regional; the plan should have
had a focus on land-use, environment planning, transportation planning, economic development, or community
development.
Employing a mixed-method approach, I analyzed how different organizational and technological considerations
are related with OPT usefulness in plan-making. I used descriptive statistical analysis methods to analyze the
survey findings and explore why and how the OPTs are used by planners; and regression analysis methods to
examine what factors influence planners’ satisfaction of using the OPTs in plan making. In addition, semistructured content analysis and interpretive discourse analysis methods are employed to explore how planners
interpret the usefulness of OPTs.
The findings of this study show that planners find OPTs useful primarily for logistical and rational purposes of
conducting participatory processes, including validating their decisions and making sure about the consistency of
their plans with citizens’ interest. While some planners find the OPTs’ generated information valuable due to its
depth and novelty, most planners find it valuable since it politically empowers them to back up their decisions.
Not only the organizational and technological factors influence the OPTs’ usefulness, but also the stages and
purposes in which OPTs are used for.
OPTs are not used only as information gathering tools, but also as tools that allow planning organizations to
create and test scenarios, validate their thoughts and decisions, and avoid possible conflicts. However, for this
process to be effective they require either collaborating with other institutions or equipping their internal
organizational capacities. OPTs do not solve the ever-lasting challenge of participatory planning, but can influence
this process by empowering planners not only to make more confident decisions, but also to have stronger voices
in the political environment.
References
 Innes, J., & Booher, D. (2010). Planning with complexity: An introduction to collaborative rationality for
public policy. Routledge.
 DeSanctis, G., & Poole, M. (1994). Capturing the complexity in advanced technology use: Adaptive
structuration theory. Organization Science, 5(2), 121–147.
 Evans-Cowley, J., & Manta Conroy, M. (2006). The growth of e-government in municipal planning.
Journal of Urban Technology, 13(1), 81–107.
 Flyvbjerg, B. (2006). Making Organization Research Matter: Power, Values and Phronesis. In The Sage
handbook of organization studies (pp. 370–387). Thousand Oaks, California: Sage.
 Klosterman, R., & Pettit, C. (2005). An update on planning support system. Environment and Planning B:
Planning and Design, 32(4), 477–484.

Abstract Index #: 6
MITIGATION OF THE URBAN HEAT ISLAND WITH GREENING STRATEGIES: A NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING
MODEL
Abstract System ID#: 238
Individual Paper
CHUN, Bumseok [Georgia Institute of Technology] bum.chun@coa.gatech.edu, presenting author, primary author
GULDMANN, Jean-Michel [The Ohio State University] guldmann.1@osu.edu
Rapid urbanization enhances the urban heat island (UHI) intensity by displacing vegetation with impervious
surfaces. The resulting significant increase in surface temperatures (Oke, 1982; Stone, 2012; Takebayshi and
Moriyama, 2012) negatively  impact urban population through heat stress health problems, increased power
plant pollution, greenhouse gas emissions, in ozone formation. Until now, much of the literatures has focused on
2-dimentional UHI analysis, but recent research (Chun and Guldmann, 2014) has achieved a better understanding

of how urban features influence land surface temperatures (LST) in the 3-D space, using Geographical
Information system (GIS) and spatial statistical analysis.
Building on this earlier research, this study uses a non-linear programming (NLP) model for developing a UHI
mitigation strategy with tree planting in the 3-D space. The NLP model, derived from a spatial statistical model
estimated over a grid, selects roof-top and ground area for greening in order to maximize total or locationspecific temperature reductions, subject to a greening cost budget and other constraints related to land cover
transformations. This novel approach is applied with data characterizing the urban core of the city of Columbus,
Ohio.
The study involves the following steps: (a) developing a 3-D city model, (b) creating diverse urban geometric
parameters, (c) performing statistical analyses, and (d) implementing an optimization algorithm to develop
greening strategies. Finally, the model resolves the location-allocation problem for new vegetation and provides
a visualization of greening optimal locations as a decision-making support tool for UHI mitigation.
References
 Chun, B. and Guldmann, J-M (2014). Spatial statistical analysis and simulation of the urban heat island in
high-density central city. Landscape and urban_planning, Vol. 125: 76-88.
 Oke, T. (1982). The energetic basis of the urban heat island. Quarterly Journal of the Royal
Meteorological Society, Vol. 108: 1-24.
 Stone, B. (2012). The city and the coming climate: climate change in the places we live. Cambridge
University Press, New York.
 Takebayashi, H. and Moriyama, M. (2012). Relationships between the properties of an urban street
canyon and its radiant environment: introduction of appropriate urban heat island mitigation
technologies. Solar Energy, Vol. 86: 2255-2262.

Abstract Index #: 7
A GRAVITY MODELING APPROACH TO INTERGRADE HIGH-SPEED RAIL AND SEISMIC HAZARD MITIGATION FOR
FUTURE LAND-USE ALLOCATION IN CALIFORNIA
Abstract System ID#: 364
Individual Paper
WANG, Chihhao [California State University, Fresno] cwang@csufresno.edu, presenting author, primary author
CHEN, Na [The Ohio State University] chen.2572@buckeyemail.osu.edu
CHAN, Shihliang [National Taipei University] slchan@mail.ntpu.edu.tw
Transportation investment has been an important consideration in land-use planning. California high-speed rail
project, for instance, will be changing regional and urban structure of the state (Sands, 1993). With the capable
train speed of 200 mph, it would be able to approximately achieve the express travel time from Los Angeles to
Fresno by 1.5 hours, and to San Francisco by 3 hours. Due to the improved transportation network, one might
wonder if the high-speed rail would either enhance the polarization of San Francisco and Los Angeles as two
cores of the state or the other way around (i.e. the reduced travel time would be beneficial for the in-between
region the San Joaquin Valley). Moreover, these two largest California metropolitan area have been under great
seismic threats for years. Planners should be able to assess such high-speed rail  impact and the resulted seismic
risks due to disproportionally allocating future growth for high hazardous locations. This paper is therefore to
integrate these two regional concerns into a gravity model for forecasting future population, employment, and
land-use allocation, under several specified scenarios.
Modern metropolitan area are highly complex entities. Models have been used to test economic theory and
develop knowledge about the urban and regional system behavior (Iacono et al., 2008). For instance, gravity
models recognize the pattern that trips between two locations increase as the activities in the origin and
destination area increase and the travel cost/time decreases. A gravity model, TELUM, is selected here to deal
with the interrelated process of such urban and regional changes. TELUM, a GIS based system successor of

DRAM/EMPAL model, has been widely applied for numerous city in the world, particularly on the relationship
between transportation network changes and the resulted land-use allocation for economic activities (Casper et
al., 2009; Pozoukidou, 2014). In TELUM, the DRAM residential model is applied together with the EMPAL
employment model, and then both are linked to a suite of transportation model for allocating future growth
(Putman, 2010).
In our study, TELUM is used to better understand the  impact of transportation investment and seismic hazard
mitigation on economic activities and land-use development for six 5-year increments between 2005 and 2035.
Several scenarios are designed to account for regional structure changes: 1) natural growth without any policy
effects; 2) California Haigh-Speed Rail (CHSR) project; 3) seismic hazard mitigation together with the CHSR
project. Results will reveal how these changes shape future development for the state of California. This
application of gravity models would provide technical and policy insights for planning future growth.
References
 Casper, C. T., O’Brien, J., Lupa, M. R., Dimitrijevic, B., de Araujo, M. P., 2009. Application of TELUM by the
Pikes Peak, Colorado, Area Council of Governments, Transportation Research Record, 2119, 45–53.
 Pozoukidou, G., 2014. TELUM  land_use Model: An Investigation of Data Requirements and Calibration
Results for Chittenden County MPO, U.S.A., International Journal of environment, Ecological,
Geological and Geophysical Engineering, 8 (3), 154-163.
 Putman, S. H., 2010. DRAM Residential Location and  land_use Model: 40 Years of Development and
Application, in F. Pagliara et al. (eds.) Residential Location Choice, Springer Press, 61-76.
 Sands, B., 1993. The Development Effects of High-Speed Rail Stations and Implications for California,
Built Environment, 19 (3/4), 257-284.
 Iacono, M., Levinson, D., El-Geneidy A., 2008. Models of Transportation and  land_use Change: A Guide
to the Territory, Journal of Planning Literature, 22 (4), 323-340.

Abstract Index #: 8
EXPLORING THE USE OF THREE-DIMENSIONAL URBAN SIMULATION TO MODEL DEVELOPMENT
OPPORTUNITIES BASED ON SUITABILITY MODELING AND FBC REGULATIONS
Abstract System ID#: 410
Individual Paper
DUAN, Leilei [University of Florida] dll1989@ufl.edu
Problem: While Form-Based Codes (FBC) have started to gain traction in many comminuty throughout US, the
use of three-dimensional (3D) design scenario modeling to evaluate the applications of FBC regulations has been
limited. Likewise, development of 3D physical scenarios based on population allocation and land-use suitability
analysis tends to be limited mostly due to technological barriers.
Existing Research: The existing work in this area is mainly focused in comparing FBC with conventional zoning
methods. The current Land-Use Conflict Identification Strategy (LUCIS) research allocates future population
growth at parcel level based on future population projections and land-use development suitability and conflict
resolution. However, development of 3D scenarios that incorporate FBC and results of suitability modeling and
allocation scenarios is still unexplored.
Research Objective: This research aims to explore the use of procedural 3D modeling to create building envelope
opportunities based on FBC regulations and LUCIS results and population allocation scenarios.
Methodology: Several computer generated architecture (CGA) code-based templates (or procedural 3D models)
were created using CityEngine software, an extension to ArcGIS. The first template generated building
development envelopes that meet local FBC regulations. The second building development envelopes were
generated based on LUCIS suitability results and population allocation scenarios. In the latter, the envelopes were
modeled by drawing on the number of stories of the surrounding buildings, their value and the average

household size. The CGA templates were designed based on FBC and LUCIS data from Hillsborough County,
Florida.
Results & Findings: The 3D modeling results showed that FBC increased urban density. While the procedural 3D
models at this time represent only maximum development opportunity envelopes, the use of this technology
show great promise for simulating a variety of physical urban design scenarios including infill and redevelopment
based on suitability results and allocation scenarios. More broadly, procedural 3D modeling shows promise to
inform geodesign, a framework that integrates geospatial technology into the planning and design process.
Contribution: The results of this research can be applied to evaluate the existing FBC regulations considering
land-use suitability, comparing different types of urban forms, providing future urban development scenarios for
further analyses, and encouraging public participation in planning process.
References
 Carr, M. H., & Zwick, P. D. (2007). Smart land-use analysis: the lucis model land-use conflict identification
strategy. ESRI, Inc.
 Littlejohn Engineering Associates. (2012). City of Gainesville Land Development Code Update/ FormBased Code Draft.
 Steinitz, C. (2012). A Framework for Geodesign: Changing Geography by Design. CA: Esri Press.
 Woodward, K. A. (2013). Form over Use: Form-Based Codes and the Challenge of Existing Development.
Notre Dame Law Review, 88, 2627-2653.

Abstract Index #: 9
ANALYTICAL METHODS IN GIS AND INCLUSIVITY IN HISTORIC PRESERVATION: STILL A LONG WAY TO GO IN
BROOKLYN, NEW YORK
Abstract System ID#: 514
Individual Paper
GOLDMAN, Emily [Cornell University] eag53@cornell.edu
This paper uses analytical methods in GIS to explore the social landscape of historic districts in Brooklyn, New
York, and reveals that though a paradigm of inclusivity seems to have emerged in 21st century New York, this
landscape remains quite uneven today. Since the 1960s, scholars have recognized that creating historic districts
may catalyze population change, with a trend toward reducing the diversity of the population within the area
over time (McNulty and Kliment, 1976); however, empirical research on the topic is still limited (Ryberg-Webster
and Kinahan, 2014). This paper seeks to address and countervail a methodological barrier to satisfactorily
exploring this question. With historic district shapefiles, Census data, and GIS, we can now readily access
information about the populations in a city's historic districts and compare it to those in neighboring but nondesignated area; we can also compare rates of change between these two subsets of the city. These crosssectional and longitudinal analyses respectively help us to better understand the social dynamics of Historic
Preservation in today’s urban environments.
In this paper, I focus on the nineteen (19) neighborhood in Brooklyn, New York in which the borough’s historic
districts lie, and I approximate a mutually exclusive "Historic District population" and "Non Historic District
population" using Census block groups. I then use 2009-2013 American Community Survey data to ask three main
questions: 1) Are there significant differences between these two population subsets along several demographic
and socio-economic variables including population density, tenure, racial composition, educational attainment,
income, and rent?; 2) With a rather astounding fourteen (14) of Brooklyn’s thirty-one (31) historic districts
designated since 2000 (Brooklyn’s first historic district was designated in 1965), has the social landscape of
Historic Preservation become more inclusive in the 21st century?; and 3) Since 2000, have the "new" historic
districts begun to resemble the “old” historic districts in terms of their population characteristics? With the third
question, I am looking for either signs of convergence, or, on the contrary, signs of persistence—if historic
districts may actually be stemming the tides of change in 21st century Brooklyn.

I discover that in Brooklyn, New York, there appears to be a new paradigm for preservation beginning in the 21st
century that strove toward greater inclusivity in the historic district landscape; and, furthermore, that creating
new historic districts seems to be helping some comminuty hold steady amid rapid development and change
around them. (The precise mechanisms at play form another aspect of this research). However, according to the
most recent Census data, these designated area still seem to exhibit significantly advantaged socio-economic
characteristics compared to their non-designated neighbors, which should compel preservation scholars to
continue to think critically about Historic Preservation, diversity, and inclusivity. If preservationists wish to see a
city’s historic districts representative of its population on the whole, more work needs to be done toward this
end. If establishing a representative population base in a city’s historic districts is not a goal, policy implications of
this research may reverberate in other arenas of urban governance, such as Cultural Affairs. Historic Preservation
has a history of scholarship and practice devoted to diversity and inclusivity (Lee, 1987; Kaufman, 2009; Tomlan,
2014); by carrying out empirical research about the social dynamics of historic districts using 21st century data
and technology, we can develop a much deeper understanding of where we are with those themes, and where
we might want to go.
References
 McNulty, R., and Kliment, S. Neighborhood Conservation: a handbook of methods and techniques. New
York, Whitney Library of Design, 1976.
 Ryberg-Webster, S., and Kinhan, K. (2014) Historic Preservation and Urban Revitalization in the 21st
Century. Journal of Planning Literature, 29(2) 119-139.
 Stipe, R., and Lee, A. The American Mosaic: Preserving a Nation's Heritage. Washington DC: US/ICOMOS,
1987
 Kaufman, N. Place, Race, and Story. New York: Routledge, 2009.
 Tomlan, M. Historic Preservation: Caring for our Expanded Legacy. New York: Spring, 2014

Abstract Index #: 10
CREATING A SPATIAL GENTRIFICATION INDEX
Abstract System ID#: 550
Individual Paper
LEE, So Young [The Ohio State University] lee.3538@osu.edu
Over the past 50 years, scholars have focused on three questions about gentrification: (1) its causes (2) how it
changes over time, and (3) its impact on neighborhood. Despite extensive study, little agreement exists
concerning gentrification’s causes and  impact, mainly because measures of gentrification vary across studies.
The choice of appropriate measures is not always clear, given the varied types of change in social structure and
housing characteristics among different city or even in different neighborhood within the same city
(Beauregard, 1990). Additionally, studies of gentrification are usually conducted on the specific metropolitanarea, making the employ of such measures across contexts untried.
Scholarly have attempted to develop the measuring methods of gentrification. Specifically, Wyly and Hammel
(1998) find that remarkably similar change in socioeconomic composition (e.g. income, education, occupation) in
different city occurs in gentrifying area between 1960 and 1990. However, their study only includes a limited
set of socioeconomic measures and housing characteristics associated with gentrification, which is a drawback.
Using Wyly and Hammel (1998) work as a starting point, this paper aims to measure gentrification in the United
States between 1990 and 2010 by widening the possible indicators from related research (e.g. Melchert & Naroff
(1987), Knotts & Haspel (2006)). The paper will consider trade-offs among a variety of indicators, connecting a
broad spectrum of indicators that are associated with the complexity and universality of gentrification. The paper
creates a Spatial Gentrification Index (SGI) and uses it to illustrate variations in the degree of gentrification.
The research employs a quantitative methodological design to create the index and test its validity. First of all,
multivariate analysis allows for the selection of key determinants. Second, I calculate the SGI for every block

group in the top 250 MSAs throughout the US from 1990 to 2010. Finally, I assess the relationship between SGI
and changes in neighborhood. In addition, I will map the spatial distribution of gentrification throughout the US
visually by using Geographic Information System (GIS), which enables to use color ranges to display different
values on a spatial map. The degree of gentrification will be classified by quantile and changes in demographic
and socioeconomic compositions, housing affordability will overlay to demonstrate the relationship.
References
 Beauregard, R. A. (1990). Trajectories of neighborhood change: the case of gentrification. Environment
& Planning A, 22(7).
 Knotts, H. G., & Haspel, M. (2006). The Impact of Gentrification on Voter Turnout*. Social Science
Quarterly, 87(1), 110-121. doi: 10.1111/j.0038-4941.2006.00371.x
 Melchert, D., & Naroff, J. L. (1987). Central City Revitalization: A Predictive Model. Real Estate
Economics, 15(1), 664-683. doi: 10.1111/1540-6229.00409
 Wyly, E. K., & Hammel, D. J. (1998). Modeling the context and contingency of gentrification. Journal of
Urban Affairs, 20(3), 303-326. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9906.1998.tb00424.x

Abstract Index #: 11
WHERE WOULD PEOPLE LIKE TO TWEET? - ASSESSING THE SPATIAL ASSOCIATION OF BUILT ENVIRONMENT
AND TWEETS
Abstract System ID#: 590
Individual Paper
CHEN, Yan [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] yanc@live.unc.edu, presenting author, primary author
SONG, Yan [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] ys@email.unc.edu
LI, Chaosu [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] chaosuli@live.unc.edu
People enjoy popular and vibrant places. An essential part of creating these popularity and vibrancy would be the
optional and social activity. Since Jane Jacobs and Jan Gehl, there have been numerous studies on optional and
social activity in urban spaces. Most of these studies are qualitative and small scale. It's mainly because the
traditional data collection methods for interview, survey and observation don't allow the researchers to produce
a large sample size. Therefore, the efficiency of the statistical model cannot be secured. More recently, the era
of big data offered us a new opportunity. Nowadays many people post their location and activity on social media
that could be considered as a representation of their optional and social activities.
In this study, we aim to examine the relationship between the spatial distribution of tweets and physical
environment features at a census block group level in four city. We would like to analyze the significance and
magnitude of the association. Using multiple sources, we create a database of built environment in Chicago,
Birmingham, Oakland, and Minneapolis. All geo-coded tweets in these four city are collected for seven days
from September 11th to September 18th via the Twitter API system.
To pursue the research question, first we will employ the hot-spot analysis to compare the spatial cluster of
tweets and food/beverage stores. Secondly, we will construct a set of measures on built environment such as
density, diversity, design, destination, regional structure and socio-demographic aspects at census block group
level based on the theory of urban form. Thirdly, we will employ a multi-level regression model, with the twitter
counts in each census block group as the dependent variable and other locational and demographic variables as
independent variables. Finally, the coefficients will be standardized to compare these factors’ impact on tweets
activities in the four city.
For a long time, planners and urbanists have been discussing how to build vibrancy in a city. This article may
initiate a new quantitative perspective to evaluate the issue. The result will offer us more understandings of how
built environment is related to optional and social activity today in the information society. It can tell us which
factors are positively linked to these activities and which character contribute the most among them. Planning
field already starts seeking the potential application of big data to help understand the urban fabric. Most of

them remain as descriptive now. This study will provide an empirical and statistical evidence to guide urban
planners in decision-making.
*Part of the built environment data is provided by Carolina Population Center at University of North Carolina –
Chapel Hill
References
 Clifton, K., Ewing, R., Knaap, G. J., & Song, Y. (2008). Quantitative analysis of urban form: a
multidisciplinary review. Journal of Urbanism,
 Ewing, R., & Cervero, R. (2010). Travel and the built environment: a meta-analysis. Journal of the
American planning association, 76(3), 265-294.
 Song, Y., & Knaap, G. J. (2004). Measuring urban form: Is Portland winning the war on sprawl?. Journal of
the American Planning Association, 70(2), 210-225.
 Gehl, J., & Svarre, B. (2013). How to study public life. Island Press. Chicago
 Cheng, Z., Caverlee, J., & Lee, K. (2010, October). You are where you tweet: a content-based approach to
geo-locating twitter users. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM international conference on Information and
knowledge management (pp. 759-768). ACM.

Abstract Index #: 12
EXPLORING THE USE OF ‘DIG DATA’ FOR ANALYZING TRAFFIC-RELATED AIR POLLUTION IN CHINESE city
Abstract System ID#: 672
Individual Paper
YIN, li [University at Buffalo, SUNY] liyin@buffalo.edu, presenting author, primary author
WU, liang [China University of Geosciences] wuliang133@189.cn
Beijing and other major Chinese city have been experiencing severe haze pollution characterized by a thick haze
layer covering these city for days, largely due to weather patterns and emissions from traffic and industrial
plants. “Emerging evidence specifically links the traffic-related component of air pollution to negative effects on
health” such as asthma, lung cancer, and cardiovascular risk (Brauer et al., 2013). Recent studies have suggested
that traffic is the main cause for urban air pollution (Guo et al. (2014).
Urban transportation system and their relationship to urban form is at the heart of developing ecologicallybased, sustainable, and livable city (Kenworthy, 2006). Previous studies have assessed “the association between
health  impact and simple measure of proximity to traffic based on observations of steep pollutant concentration
gradients as a function of distance to roads” (Henderson et al., 2007). However, data and method used in these
studies are not sufficient in capturing the variability in pollutant concentration and traffic volume over time. They
cannot efficiently model the association between pollutant measures and  land_use characteristics at a high
resolution in large area.  land_use regression has been used to predict ambient air pollutant concentrations
(Henderson et al., 2007) and is potentially useful for the temporal prediction at a high spatial resolution to help
assess spatiotemporal patterns of traffic-related pollution. Most  land_use regression, however, “neglected the
variation of air pollution” over the study period (Fang and Liu, 2011). They “lack fine-scale temporal resolution
for predicting acute exposure and regulatory monitoring provides daily concentrations, but fails to capture spatial
variability within urban area” (Johnson et al., 2013). In addition, length of highways or major roads are generally
used (with a few studies used traffic density) with insufficient consideration on variation of traffic volumes over
time.
“With the recent rapid development of internet and cloud computing, we are entering the era of ‘big data’” (Yin
et al., 2014). “‘Big data’ was defined to account for the effort to make the rapidly expanding amount of digital
information analyzable and “the actual use of that data as a means to improve productivity, generate and
facilitate innovation and improve decision making” (Yin et al., 2014). The GPS equipped taxis are mobile sensors
that can help collect traffic information. In Beijing, there has been approximately 68,000 licensed taxis and GPS
units were installed on many of them. Websites such as Baidu provide real time traffic information on highways

and major roads, updated every 15 minutes. Other websites such as Aqicn provides information on air quality
and weather from air quality monitoring stations around the world updated every half an hour. Weibo
information can be used to extract  land_use related information. All of these become a source of ‘big data’ on real
time air pollution and traffic and have a great potential to help understand the association between traffic
patterns,  land_use patterns, and traffic-related pollution in major Chinese city.
This study aims to explore the use of  land_use regression and ‘big data’ including Baidu real time traffic data for
the past half year, air quality data from Aqicn, taxi GPS data, and Weipo data on the analysis of the traffic
patterns,  land_use patterns, and traffic-related air pollutions in Beijing, Shanghai, and Wuhan. Results can help
develop policy guidelines that incorporate health concerns and encourage integrated  land_use – transportation
planning to increase active transportation to decrease air pollution and greenhouse gas emission, and reduce
traffic congestion, especially targeted to specific area for vulnerable populations.
References
 Brauer, M., Reynolds, C. and Hystad, P. 2013. Traffic-related air pollution and health in Canada. CMAJ,
October
 Guo, S., Hu, M., Zamora, M., Peng, J., Shang, D., Zheng, J. Du, Z., Wu, Z., Shao, M., Zeng, L., Molina, M.,
and Zhang, R. 2014. Elucidating severe urban haze formation in China. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
 Henderson, S.B., Beckerman, B., Jerrett, M., Brauer, M. 2007. Application of  land_use regression to
estimate long-term concentrations of traffic-related nitrogen oxides and fine particulate matter. Environ
Sci Technol 41:2422–2428.
 Johnson, M., Macneill, M., Grgicak-Mannion, A., Nethery, E., Xu, X., Dales, R., Rasmussen, P., Wheeler, A.
2013. Development of temporally refined land-use regression models predicting daily household-level
air pollution in a panel study of lung function among asthmatic children. J Exp Sci Env Epidemiol 23:259–
267
 Yin, L., Cheng, Q., Shao, Z., Wang, Z. and Wu, L. (2014). ‘Big Data’: Pedestrian Volume Using Google
Street View Images. In proceedings of the Workshops on Big Data and Urban Informatics, University of
Illinois at Chicago, IL.

Abstract Index #: 13
A HISTORICAL DATA-BASED MULTIPLE CRITERIA EVALUATION METHOD FOR LAND SUITABILITY ANALYSIS
Abstract System ID#: 742
Individual Paper
FU, Xin [University of Cincinnati] fuxi@mail.uc.edu, presenting author, primary author
WANG, Xinhao [University of Cincinnati] wangxo@ucmail.uc.edu
Multiple Criteria Evaluation (MCE) is a multi-attributes decision making tool, in which the  impact of criteria are
evaluated according to the relative importance (weights) of individual criterion (Rao, 2005). The MCE output is
often used in land suitability analysis and  land_use modeling, such as Cellular Automata (CA)-Markov model. The
MCE process mainly includes criterion selection, suitability score assignment, weight assignment, and linear
weighted combination. The choice and use of MCE criteria include interview, inquiry, survey, and in-depth
literature review (Store & Kangas, 2001). The quantification methods used for selection and weight assignment
most are Delphi, Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP), Principle Component Analysis (Lee & Chan, 2008), or Entropy
method. The criterion scores are normally assigned using either specific values or fuzzy logic method (Edmundas
& Jurgita, 2007). The common problem in these approaches is that local historical data are not used in selecting
and weighing criteria and assigning scores to each criterion. The goal of this research is to explore the feasibility
of using historical data of a study area to quantitatively select, weigh, and score criteria in the MCE process.
Going through the literature extensively, we have not been found a similar research.
We propose to use the Logistic regression model to select and assign standardized scores for each criterion used
in MCE. Logistic regression model has been widely used to predict probability of  land_use changes for a specific

 land_use class based on a set of scores on the predictor variables. In this research, the probability of each
criterion will be converted into the degree of suitability of the criterion. Data used in this research include 2000
and 2010 parcel level  land_use for Hamilton County, Ohio. The  land_use categories include residential,
commercial, agricultural, undeveloped, and others. The list of potential MCE criteria is compiled from literature
review. Examples of the criteria are slope, population change, median household income, distance to highways,
etc. Each potential MCE criterion is operationalized to fit a logistic regression model. If the fitted model is
statistically significant at the 0.05 level, the criterion will be selected, and then the probability of the criterion
causing  land_use change will be used to assign scores. We then use the Entropy method to determine the weights
of each criterion, which is proportion to the relative magnitude of change over the overall system. The MCE
output is then used in a CA-Markov  land_use model to simulate  land_use changes from 2000 to 2010. The
simulated 2010  land_use is compared with the 2010  land_use data. The goodness of fit is measured with Kappa
Index and overall accuracy (correctly simulated cells over total cells). We use ArcGIS, SPSS and IDRISI in this
research.
The result shows that the use of MCE criteria derived from the historical data for the study area in the CA-Markov
model simulation produces reasonable goodness of fit (about 0.83 for Kappa Index and 87% for overall accuracy).
The literature shows that the desirable goodness of fit is greater than 80% for overall accuracy (Mondal &
Southworth, 2010). The major advantage of the method developed in this research is that the criterion selection,
weights, and criterion scores are all derived from local data, which reflects the actual historical trend.
Understanding them serves as the basis for developing different planning scenarios which are represented by
different MCE criteria and their weights and scores.
References
 Edmundas, & Jurgita. (2007). Multiple criteria evaluation of rural building’s regeneration alternatives.
Building and Environment, 42, 436-451.
 Lee, G. K., & Chan, E. H. (2008). The Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) Approach for Assessment of Urban
Renewal Proposals. Social Indicators Research, 89, 155-168.
 Mondal, P., & Southworth, J. (2010). Evaluation of conservation interventions using a cellular automataMarkov model. Forest Ecology and Management, 260, 1716-1725.
 Rao, K. D. (2005). Multi-criteria spatial decision analysis for forecasting urban water requirements: a case
study of Dehradun city, India. Landscape and urban_planning, 71, 163-174.
 Store, R., & Kangas, J. (2001). Intergrating spatial multi-criteria evaluation and expert knowledge for GISbased habitat suitability modelling. Landscape and urban_planning, 55, 79-93.

Abstract Index #: 14
CLUSTERING U.S. urban_planning FACULTY: PEER IDENTIFICATION AND EVALUATION
Abstract System ID#: 844
Individual Paper
SANCHEZ, Thomas [Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State University] tom.sanchez@vt.edu, presenting author,
primary author
PARIS, Soren [Independent IT Consultant] sorenparis@gmail.com
This paper uses urban_planning faculty publication data to create clusters of scholarly peers. The research builds
upon a previous analysis presented at the 2014 ACSP meeting in Philadelphia, that used the Guide to
Undergraduate and Graduate Education in Urban and Regional Planning to examine the knowledge domain(s) of
planning. The previous analysis used the area of expertise and interests for over 900 regular faculty listed in the
Guide. These were self-reported area of teaching and research interests that were used to characterize
specializations within urban_planning program. The current analysis focuses instead on networks of individual
planning faculty that result from not only their publication topics but also their years of service. The resulting
sets of planning faculty peers are those individuals that can be compared directly with each other not only based
on research but also their seniority (years) and rank (title). The results can be used to evaluate faculty in terms of
scholarly performance and also help planning program consider the contributions of their faculty.

References
 Boyack, K. W., Klavans, R., & Börner, K. (2005). Mapping the backbone of science. Scientometrics, 64(3),
351-374.
 Kärki, R. (1996). Searching for bridges between disciplines: an author co-citation analysis on the research
into scholarly communication. Journal of information science, 22(5), 323-334.
 Sanchez, T.W. and Afzalan, N., Mapping the Knowledge Domain of urban_planning (February 12, 2015).
Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2564185 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2564185
 Sanchez, T.W. (2014). Academic Visibility and the Webometric Future, The Journal of the World
Universities Forum, 6(2): 37-52.

Abstract Index #: 15
ADVANCED TIME SERIES AND SPATIAL DEPENDENCE MODELS FOR POPULATION FORECASTING
Abstract System ID#: 878
Individual Paper
DRUMMOND, William [Georgia Institute of Technology] bill.drummond@gatech.edu, presenting author, primary
author
KRAFT, Benjamin [Georgia Institute of Technology] Ben.Kraft@gatech.edu
Forecasts of population and employment are fundamental building blocks for traditional approaches to  land_use
planning (Berke, Godschalk, and Kaiser 2006, pp. 117-146) and transportation planning (Meyer and Miller 2001,
pp. 341-371). If the forecasts are substantially low, planners will not allocate sufficient suitable land for different
 land_uses and transportation infrastructure will be under-sized resulting in avoidable congestion. If the forecasts
are too high, development may sprawl across a larger-than-optimal area and the government will over-invest in
unnecessary infrastructure.
Forecasting even such a basic variable as aggregate population is inherently difficult due to the multi-decade time
frame plus the necessary but often questionable forecasting assumption that the future will resemble the past.
Richard Klosterman believes that these problems are so severe that planners should “… abandon the futile effort
to predict what the future will be …” (Klosterman 1994, p. 164) and replace traditional forecast-based planning
with scenario planning built upon public participation and a range of narrative storylines.
However, this paper will argue that recent advances in business forecasting models and spatial analysis methods
can (1) achieve better accuracy than traditional projection approaches, (2) provide tools to address projection
uncertainty, and (3) incorporate additional predictive variables that can contribute to improved decisions
(Hopkins 2001, p. 70-74). We demonstrate our approach by developing projections for 3,100 U.S. counties using
base data from 1969 to 1993 and projecting forward to 2013. For comparison purposes we also apply a set of
traditional projection methods (Rayer 2008), then calculate and compare mean absolute percent errors (MAPEs)
and mean algebraic percent errors (MALPEs).
There are three components to our approach. First, for each county we generate three ARIMA, two exponential
smoothing, and two damped trend projection models. The seven models are averaged together to produce a
single 2013 forecast for each area. Second, we incorporate spatial dependence into the forecasts by applying a
regression model using a dependent variable of a county’s observed change ratio (actual 2013 population divided
by actual 1993 population) and independent variables of (a) the forecast change ratio (forecast 2013 population
divided by actual 1993 population), and (b) the forecast change ratio of all edge-contiguous counties. Third, we
add employment and per capita income as additional independent variables using two forms of each variable: the
variable’s forecast change ratio of the county and the variable’s forecast change ratio for all contiguous counties.
The models use public time-series data from the Census Bureau and Bureau of Economic Analysis; R, which is a
free statistical package; and the "forecast" package for R, which is also free.

Finally, we apply statistical confidence limits derived by averaging the seven projection model confidence limits,
and test them against the actual distribution of 2013 population values. We conclude by suggesting that
population forecasts should include 50% confidence limits in order to present planners and decision makers with
a most-likely forecast, a plausibly-high forecast that would be exceeded 25% of the time, and a plausibly low
forecast under which the actual population value will fall 25% of the time. Plans that are developed around all
three forecast values are more likely to produce desirable outcomes under a reasonable range of possible
population futures.
References
 Berke, P., D. R. Godschalk, and E. J. Kaiser. (2006). Urban  land_use planning. Urbana, University of Illinois
Press.
 Hopkins, L. D. (2001). Urban development: the logic of making plans. Washington, DC, Island Press.
 Klosterman, R. E. (2013). "Lessons learned about planning forecasting, participation, and technology."
Journal of the American Planning Association 79(2): 161-169.
 Meyer, M. D. and E. J. Miller (2001). Urban transportation planning: a decision-oriented approach.
Boston, McGraw-Hill.
 Rayer, S. (2008). "Population forecast errors - a primer for planners." Journal of Planning Education and
Research 27(4): 417-430.

Abstract Index #: 16
INDIVIDUAL MOBILITY INFERENCE USING SPARSE CDR DATA: A DATA FUSION APPROACH
Abstract System ID#: 887
Individual Paper
ZHAO, Zhan [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] zhanzhaowf@hotmail.com, presenting author, primary
author
ZHAO, Jinhua [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] jinhua@mit.edu
Recent years have seen an increasing body of literature of using CDR data to estimate mobility patterns at the
individual level (e.g. Gonzalez et al. (2008)) and OD matrices at the system level (e.g. Calabrese et al. (2011)).
However, there is a lack of systematic discussions regarding limitations of the data. One critical limitation of CDR
data for mobility analysis is sparsity. For majority of users, their mobile phone records are sparsely and irregularly
distributed over time, leading to certain periods of time, or gaps, when we have no observations of their
whereabouts. With these gaps, our observation of the user’s spatiotemporal profiles would be incomplete, and
our estimation of the user’s mobility patterns based on such incomplete profiles would be prone to biases, an
issue receiving little attention from existing literature of human mobility analysis using CDR data. In this work, we
bring attention to the sparse sampling issue of CDR data. The objective of the paper is to develop a
methodological framework to address this limitation of CDR data by inferring individual mobility during gaps
based on statistical models.
In this paper, we propose a data fusion approach to estimate models for inference of individual mobility during
gaps. While CDR datasets typically contain records from a large population, observations for each individual are
generally sparse. In order to estimate models, we need to combine CDR data with complementary data (without
the same limitations) that provides richer information for a subgroup of individuals, such as GPS data. Thus we
can extract a labeled training sample, with feature matrix X from large-scale data and label vector Y from
complementary data. In reality, however, such complementary data is costly to collect, especially when the data
collected needs to be individually matched with a subset of CDR data.
Despite of the practical challenge, it is still possible to apply the same data fusion approach even with only CDR
data. This is because multiple types of mobile phone transactions recorded in CDR data, including phone calls,
short messaging service (SMS) messages, and data activities. Unlike phone-call and SMS activities, user data
activities do not always require user initiation or user participation (Ranjan et al. 2012). On devices with enabled
cellular data capability, a plethora of mobile applications automatically make periodic or sporadic connections to

the 3G/4G cellular network. These data activities are recorded as data access records. Therefore, in absence of
complementary data, we can still make inference of these users’ mobility during gaps, by extracting X from
phone-call and SMS records and Y from data access records.
The proposed data fusion approach is demonstrated in solving a specific problem – hidden visit inference. A visit
can only be revealed by CDR data if there is a mobile phone record associated with it. If a user makes a visit to a
location but does not generate any phone record, this visit is hidden to us. The objective is to infer whether there
exists a hidden visit between two consecutive revealed visits. From a CDR dataset of Jinan, China, we select a
sample of 10,000 gaps, one for each mobile user. Four different data mining techniques are used for modeling –
logistic regression, random forests, neural networks, and support vector machine. Using each of the methods, we
build a model to classify gaps as having a hidden visit or not. The predictive performances of the four models
show significant improvement (18~20%) over the naïve assumption (assuming no hidden visit).
The new approach proposed in the paper will help provide us a more complete picture of individual mobility
profiles and improve our ability to infer travel demand using sparse CDR data, especially when no complementary
data is available.
References
 Calabrese, Francesco, Giusy Di Lorenzo, Liang Liu, and Carlo Ratti. 2011. “Estimating Origin-Destination
Flows Using Mobile Phone Location Data.” IEEE Pervasive Computing 10 (4): 36–44.
doi:10.1109/MPRV.2011.41.
 González, Marta C., César A. Hidalgo, and Albert-László Barabási. 2008. “Understanding Individual
Human Mobility Patterns.” Nature 453 (7196): 779–82. doi:10.1038/nature06958.
 Ranjan, Gyan, Hui Zang, Zhi-Li Zhang, and Jean Bolot. 2012. “Are Call Detail Records Biased for Sampling
Human Mobility?” ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing and Communications Review 16 (3): 33.
doi:10.1145/2412096.2412101.

Abstract Index #: 17
ACCURACY AND USEFULNESS MEASURES FOR LAND-USE CHANGE (LUC) MODELING TO FACILITATE STRATEGIC
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT (SSD)
Abstract System ID#: 927
Individual Paper
PAN, Haozhi [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] hpan8@illinois.edu, presenting author, primary author
DEAL, Brian [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign] deal@illinois.edu
It has been almost 30 years since scholars started using CA based models to assess and project changes in urban
land-use patterns (White and Engelen, 1994). First iterations of these land-use change (LUC) models were
severely hampered by land-use data availability. Since the early 2000’s however, data availability issues have
been receding. In fact, newly updated land-use/ land cover maps of the US have enabled time series analysis of
land-use changes that will be useful for back casting, forecasting, and LUC model calibration.
Past (and current) approaches to calibrating and verifying LUC model accuracy has been typically conducted by:
comparing aggregated numeric results, visual validation, cell-by-cell overlay, or by aggregating change by spatial
subdivision (such as 30-minute travel zones) (Xia and Ye, 2010). These approaches have some noted technical and
practical deficiencies including: difficulty tracking distribution outcomes, lack of objectivity, scalar accuracy
issues, and arbitrary subdivision scales and boundaries (Batty and Xie, 2005).
In this paper, we propose improvements to the spatial subdivision approach to calibrating and verifying LUC
models. The first improvement is in catchment area identification. In our new technique, catchment or
subdivision sizes can vary within a large range of values using kernel density methods to cluster variables and
dissolve boundary conditions. Our second improvement addresses spatial structure. This technique applies
manifold clustering to small size subdivisions. After clustering the subdivisions we can see structural information

(such as where centers of development are and how many clusters of growth have emerged) of the simulation
and actual models in order to inform if the simulation model grasps the core developmental structure of the
region. Finally, we use our new accuracy measure approaches to test for usefulness. We do this by comparing
applied accuracy tests to both a “reference” and a “least impact” LUC scenario. A comparative analysis is then
used to evaluate whether model results have been effectively and usefully applied in the specific planning
context.
We apply these improvements to an analysis of the Land-use Evolution and Impact Assessment Model’s (LEAM)
simulation results of the Chicago metro region. We use 2011 National Land Cover Database (NLCD) data to
measure LEAM’s simulation model performance and for calibration, verification, and usefulness purposes.
References
 Deal, B., Pallathucheril, G., & Pan, H. (2014). Planning Support system in the Rear View Mirror.
Presented at the 49th Annual Conference of the Association of Collegiate Schools of Planning,
Philadelphia, PA.
 Holmberg, J., & Karl-Henrik, R. (2000). Backcasting from non-overlapping sustainability principles— a
framework for strategic planning. International Journal of Sustainable Development and World Ecology,
7, 291–308.
 Xia, L & Yeh, A.G. (2010). Data mining of cellular automata's transition rules. International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 18:88, 723-744
 Batty, M., & Xie, Y. (2005). Urban growth using cellular automata models. In GIS, Spatial Analysis, and
Modeling. Maguire, D. Batty, M., Goodchild, M. eds (pp. 151–172). Redlands, CA: ESRI Press.

Abstract Index #: 18
ENHANCING WATER RESOURCES PLANNING WITH PARTICIPATORY VISUALIZATION OF COUPLED HUMAN AND
HYDROLOGICAL system
Abstract System ID#: 1006
Individual Paper
ZELLNER, Moira [University of Illinois at Chicago] mzellner@uic.edu, presenting author, primary author
LYONS, Leilah [University of Illiniois at Chicago] llyons@uic.edu
MILZ, Dan [University of Illiniois at Chicago] dmilz2@uic.edu
HOCH, Charles [University of Illiniois at Chicago] chashoch@uic.edu
RADINSKY, Joshua [University of Illinois at Chicago] joshuar@uic.edu
We present the findings of a 3-year project on the use of visualization tools in collaborative water planning
efforts in Northeast Illinois. We set out to understand how such tools allow people planning for future water
sustainability to jointly see the hidden effects of land- and water-use decisions on water supply, and how such
visualization contributes to collective deliberation and policy innovation. We first built a developmental
participatory agent-based approach, where stakeholders worked in small groups around a progression of coupled
land-use and hydrological models—from highly abstracted to geographically detailed—to recognize and assess
the  impact of proposed policy. Stakeholders learned how to use the models, understand the relationships
among their components, interpret the meaning of their outputs, and modify the models with new insights from
the discussions and their experience. Stakeholders jointly witnessed how water shortages could not be prevented
by their preferred strategies if residential expansion continued. Despite the improved understanding, participants
resisted policy innovation beyond the strategies they already knew. Adding details to simplified models did little
to reduce participants’ cognitive dissonance and increase collective trust in the evidence they had generated.
Instead, they challenged the validity of the models and of the research team. The instructional setting was not
conducive to such agency, but rather pitted some stakeholders against the researchers.
We re-designed the participatory process so that researchers facilitated—rather than instructed—participants’
collaborative use of available online data and mapping resources, rather than the complex models used in our
first trials. Discussions focused on the inadequacy of available data as a resource for current engineering and

management work. The participants demonstrated knowledge of the systemic connections linking aquifers and
streams across the region, but they framed the planning problem within their boundaries of their profession and
jurisdiction. Attention to causal linkages was reverse engineered from the problems they could control at work. In
the absence of a causal model connecting to the larger region, they proposed plans for measuring and monitoring
that would primarily serve local needs. Clever water management only postponed local water shortfall in severe
drought conditions. While the facilitation style was key in overcoming resistance to new insights, we noted a
critical need for dynamic simulations of causal models, for which the challenges encountered in our agent-based
modeling trials need to be addressed.
Towards this end, we designed interfaces to support simultaneous collaborative use of hydrological simulations
with mobile devices or paper-based tangible user interfaces. Novice users were exposed to a flooding model
developed by our team to help them understand causes and  impact of urban flooding, and to allocate green
infrastructure to address this problem. Participants preferred the hands-on tactile manipulation of land cover,
especially if they did not know each other well, serving as a boundary object for discussion and action. The
tangible interface allowed participants to use gestures to discuss dynamic, emergent outcomes, like the way
runoff patterns changed, and generate solutions incorporating knowledge of these dynamics. Moreover, some
users designed solutions that were as effective as those proposed by experts. These findings highlight the power
of such tools to enhance collaborative understanding of complex environment problems and innovation of
solutions. More recently, we have developed a mobile tablet application to support compromise seeking.
Participants used the tablet to individually prioritize the results by what they considered more important (e.g.,
damage costs, extent of flooding, downstream flooding), and used them to collectively generate different green
infrastructure designs that made progress towards the participants’ diverse goals. This finding emphasizes the
need to support group goal deliberation, empathy and negotiation, beyond enhanced cognition.
References
 Zellner, M. L.; 2008. “Embracing Complexity and Uncertainty: The Potential of Agent-Based Modeling for
Environmental Planning and Policy.” Planning Theory & Practice 9 (4): 437-457.
 Zellner, M.L., Lyons, L.; Hoch, C. J.; Weizeorick, J.; Kunda, C.; Milz, D.; 2012. “Modeling, Learning and
Planning Together: An Application of Participatory Agent-Based Modeling to environment Planning.”
URISA Journal, GIS in Spatial Planning Issue, 24(1): 77-92.

Abstract Index #: 19
FORECASTING SUSTAINABLE URBAN WATER USE AND GIS MODELING APPLICATION: A CASE STUDY OF METRO
ATLANTA, GA
Abstract System ID#: 1051
Individual Paper
SUNG, Sangwoo [Georgia Institute of Technology] swsung@gatech.edu, presenting author, primary author
FRENCH, Steven [Georgia Institute of Technology] steve.french@coa.gatech.edu
Although individual water use levels (or gallon per capita use) in US have been gradually declined for last
decades, increase of population, urbanization, sprawl, and decay of existing conventional infrastructure
continuously raise water issues in urban area. In general, water use is closely tied to  land_use types and physical
characteristics of built environment; however, still few studies have suggested practical water forecasting models
that integrates land-use change/urban growth policy with future urban water use demand.
In this study, we discuss sustainable water use framework including water use determinants and propose a GIS
modeling application called 'Sustainable water use scenario-based decision support system' (SWSPSS) which
allows planners to test a series of water conservation and sustainable growth policy. We chose metro Atlanta,
GA as our case study region in order to answer our main research question, ‘what are the  impact of alternative
urban growth and water conservation scenarios on water use and how would they spatially vary in the future?’.

Development of SWSPSS involves in three major tasks; 1) development of the list of local/global representative
coefficients of water use sectors, 2) development of sustainable water use scenarios and the modification of
parameter values, and 3) construction of sub-models that simulates future urban growth and projects future
sustainable water use.
First, we identified indoor-outdoor representative water coefficients by  land_use from
local water reports, literature, county water withdrawal data and local customer water billing records. These
coefficients are used as default parameters for base case scenario in SWSPSS. In next, multiple sustainable
scenarios are developed in terms of both urban growth policy and technological conservation strategies for
indoor use, outdoor use, and rainwater harvesting. The input parameters each scenario are modified
accordingly. Especially, we developed a regression model to estimate a size of regional roofing area for rainwater
harvesting and estimated the water savings in alternative sustainable development scenarios. The last step
involves in developing the modules and the sub-models that simulate urban growth and water use projections
under the given scenarios. For this study case, we simulated the future  land_use changes and water use patterns
based on exogenous population and employment information produced by the Atlanta Regional Commission up
to 2035. The models are constructed as either python script tools or models in ArcGIS ModelBuilder
environment.
In sum, this research offers the methodological framework to integrate water conservation strategies with
growth scenarios for sustainable urban water management. The SWSPSS application enabled users to estimate
the amount of water demand for every 5-year period projection and generated the map data showing spatial
patterns of future water demand. Because it provides spatial layers of  land_use and water use patterns, planners
can easily identify the range of future water consumption and high priority area for additional infrastructure
provision, if necessary.
References
 Klosterman, R. E. 2005. "An update on planning support system." Environment and Planning B: Planning
and Design no. 32:477-484.
 Arbués, F., Garcı ́a-Valiñas, M. a. Á., & Martı ́nez-Espiñeira, R. (2003). Estimation of residential water
demand: a state-of-the-art review. Journal of Socio-Economics, 32(1), 81-102.
 Chang, H., Parandvash, G., & Shandas, V. .2010. Spatial Variations of Single-Family Residential Water
Consumption in Portland, Oregon. Urban Geography, 31(7), 953-972
 Vickers, A. 2001. Water use and Conservation. Amherst, MA: Waterplow press.
 Wentz, E., Gober, P. 2007. Determinants of Small-Area Water Consumption for the City of Phoenix,
Arizona. Water Resources Management, 21(11), 1849-1863.

Abstract Index #: 20
MEASURING URBAN SYSTEM COMPLEXITY FROM A LAND-USE CHANGE MODELING PERSPECTIVE
Abstract System ID#: 1081
Individual Paper
DEAL, Brian [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign] deal@illinois.edu, presenting author, primary author
PAN, Haozhi [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] hpan8@illinois.edu
Unraveling the complexity of city has been a growing topic of interest in planning (Batty, 2012). Researchers
are currently borrowing measurement and other tools from natural sciences (Gao et al., 2006), physics, and
information sciences (Li & Liu, 2006), in order to better understand urban system complexities. These borrowed
tools however, may have limited usefulness within the planning discipline. For example, these tools have been
too theoretical, typically are not able to differentiate between different spatial regions, and generally provide
little if any, guidance for planning practice. In this paper, we propose a planning-centric approach for analyzing
urban system complexity. Our hope is to improve the connection between complex urban system
understanding and planning practice.
Our approach is based on statistical learning theory (SLT). SLT generally deals with the problem of finding a
predictive function based on static time series data. In SLT, a higher degree-of-freedom (increasing the number

of independent parameters that can specify the system) will most often result in a better goodness-of-fit. Higher
degrees of freedom can be realized through adding more explanatory variables to the model or assigning nonlinear formulas to model variables. The same theory however, states that overly high degrees-of-freedom
(referred to as over fitting) may improve fit, but may not necessarily improve predicative power (Hastie &
Friedman, 2009). The relevant question becomes how many variables are needed to provide adequate fit and
strong predictive power? This is especially important for urban growth models that are commonly used to assess
potential future system states. If we can find an optimum predictive variable set, we can simplify model
parameters, reduce uncertainty, and improve our understanding of future system behavior thereby improving
our understanding of system complexity.
The optimal degree-of-freedom (the appropriate number of drivers and complexity of variable formulas for the
strongest predictive power) in LUC simulation exists uniquely for every spatial region. In this paper, we describe
an approach to calculating this optimum in the Chicago metro region using an application of the Land-use
Evolution and impact Assessment Model (LEAM). We use 2 periods of National Land Cover Database (NLCD)
land-use data (2001 and 2006) for McHenry County, IL as training data. We use a regression based, generalized
linear model (GLM), variable selection methods, and sensitivity analysis to test combinations of drivers that best
fit model results to training data (2011 NLCD data). This approach will help single out variable driver
combinations that best predict known 2011 outcomes.
Our study contributes to the field of planning in 2 important ways. First, it will enable faster and more efficient
calibration and sensitivity analysis processes for current urban LUC models. Our urban complexity measurement
technique will also produce useful information on variable sensitivity and on LUC pattern interpretation. Because
our complexity measure is tailored to a specific spatial region, it provides useful insights that can help guide
planning practice in that region.
References
 Batty, M. (2012). Building a science of city. city, 29(1), S9–S16.
 Hastie, T., & Friedman, J. (2009). The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and
Prediction. Berlin Heidelberg, Germany: Springer.
 Li, X., & Liu, X. (2006). An extended cellular automaton using case‐based reasoning for simulating urban
development in a large complex region. International Journal of Geographical Information Science,
20(10).

Abstract Index #: 21
URBAN ENERGY MODELING IN THE INTEGRATED URBAN METABOLISM ANALYSIS TOOL (IUMAT)
Abstract System ID#: 1104
Individual Paper
MOSTAFAVI, Nariman [University of Massachusetts, Amherst] smostafa@eco.umass.edu, presenting author,
primary author
FARZINMOGHADAM, Mohamad [University of Massachusetts, Amherst] mfarzinmoghadam@larp.umass.edu
HOQUE, Simi [University of Massachusetts, Amherst] simih@eco.umass.edu
Integrated Urban Metabolism Analysis Tool (IUMAT) is a holistic system-based tool for sustainability analysis of
urban neighborhood. IUMAT’s model for EWM (energy, water and materials) takes a bottom-up approach to
generate spatial resources demand profiles based on buildings and neighborhood characteristics. This paper
presents the correlations found by the EWM model between socio-economic indicators and energy consumption
profiles. For statistical inference, we work with end use consumption surveys provided by U.S. Energy
Information Administration (EIA) that are Commercial Building Energy Consumption Survey (CBECS), Residential
Energy Consumption (RECS), Manufacturing Energy Consumption (MECS), and Transportation (RTECS). We
analyze the energy data for different unit types classified within the North American Industry Classification
System (NAICS) with regards to demographic, behavioral and attitudinal parameters. Based upon the results,

using ANOVA technique we elaborate on the factors that need to be included in a robust and reliable large-scale
energy simulation. Systematic errors, along with other contributors to uncertainty will also be discussed.
References
 Mostafavi, N., Farzinmoghadam, M., & Hoque, S. (2014). A framework for integrated urban metabolism
analysis tool (IUMAT). Building and Environment,82, 702-712.
 Mostafavi, N., Farzinmoghadam, M., Hoque, S., & Weil, B. (2014). Integrated Urban Metabolism Analysis
Tool (IUMAT). Urban Policy and Research, 32(1), 53-69.
 Chen, S., & Chen, B. (2015). Urban energy consumption: Different insights from energy flow analysis,
input–output analysis and ecological network analysis. Applied Energy, 138, 99-107.
 Kennedy, C., Pincetl, S., & Bunje, P. (2011). The study of urban metabolism and its applications to urban
planning and design. environment pollution,159(8), 1965-1973.
 Vanegas, C. A., Aliaga, D. G., Wonka, P., Müller, P., Waddell, P., & Watson, B. (2010, March). Modelling
the appearance and behaviour of urban spaces. InComputer Graphics Forum (Vol. 29, No. 1, pp. 25-42).
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Abstract Index #: 22
WHO'S VIEW: OPERATIONALIZING THE PRODUCTION OF MARGINALIZED SPACES
Abstract System ID#: 1152
Individual Paper
VANIK, Leonor [University of Illinois at Chicago] lvanik1@uic.edu
As the nation increases neoliberal policy to deinstitutionalize people with disabilities (PWD) as a cost saving
measure to State Medicaid program, little is known about the complexity of their experience after selecting and
living in comminuty that are affordable and accessible to them in geographies of uneven development. PWD
have been limited in their access to material goods, social equality, and the built environment by the dominant
society. For some able-bodied individuals, the ability to access space is an afterthought, but for some PWD, the
built environment can be exclusionary and/or tedious in the search for alternative routes attempting to access
and reach their destination. The denial to access and produce space is systematically ingrained in society
because it was not originally built for PWD, but for able-bodied individuals, and as a result, it perpetuates
accessibility issues within the built environment and the social practice of everyday life over time. If attributing
disability to the environment, it becomes necessary to understand what it is about an environment that makes it
disabling and why it is disabling for some individuals but not for others.
Building on previous research that sought to better understand the search for affordable and accessible housing
as part of the deinstitutionalization process and the amenity preferences in the community selected, this paper
presents findings from a National Science Foundation dissertation improvement study of how PWD produce
disability space in socially produced capitalist neighborhood while discussing the operationalization of a multimethod approach of "grounded critical visualization" (GCV).
GCV applies analytical approaches from three methods of qualitative inquiry [root modes]: ethnography,
phenomenology, and constructed grounded theory, which are integrated with extrapolations of photovoice to
understand and also “voice” the participants’ experience [agency] through the visual. It also applies spatial
analysis through critical GIS spatial and exploratory spatial data analysis/spatial regressions. For example, through
a reiterative process, GIS mapping of census and parcel level land data was joined with ethnographic field
research data including participant observation, interviews, field inspections, digital photography for photo
elicitation, and survey questionnaires to ascertain how people with disabilities (both individually and as a
collective) experience space, define their comminuty, navigate barriers, and use resources in their production of
space. The initial data collected by approximately 35 people with disabilities living in several Chicagoland
communities and the analysis represented through data visualization were introduced through ten focus groups
and interviews to ascertain views of approximately 38 planners, developers, and policy makers and compare
them with the views of people with disabilities.

GCV's methodological framework is also situated in the work of Lefebvre's social production of space - consisting
of spatial practice (lived experiences), representations of space (conceptualized space), and representational
space (perception of the lived space) - and other scholars undertaking his approach in the various disciplines of
culture, geography, urbanism, planning practice, and archival research. These studies incorporated the spatial
triad, but this research critically shifts the frame of analysis toward the interpretation of the production of space
by developing the spatial triad as an analytical tool to understand how social spaces of disability are produced by
people with mobile and physical disabilities. Lastly, the implications for future scholars in applying grounded
crtical visualization in other contextual factors in community and neighborhood planning are also introduced.
References
 Cope, M. and Elwood, S. (2009). Qualitative GIS, A Mixed Methods Approach. Sage, Los Angeles.
 Gleeson, B. (1999). Geographies of Disability. New York: Routledge.
 Imrie. R. (2012). Universalism universal design and equitable access to the built environment. Disability
and Rehabilitation, 34: 873-882.
 Lefebvre, H. (1991). The Production of Space (tr. fr. Nicholson-Smith Donald). Oxford U.K and Cambridge
MA: Blackwell.
 Vanik, L. (2013). Through my Eyes: Transitioning into the Community. HUD Early Doctoral Student
Research Grant. Washington, D.C.

Abstract Index #: 23
PARTICIPATORY ASSET MAPPING: A DIGITAL PLATFORM FOR THE INTEGRATION OF CULTURAL VALUES AND
ASSETS IN PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORKS
Abstract System ID#: 1242
Individual Paper
MONTENEGRO, Flavia [University of Massachusetts, Amherst] flaviamontm@larp.umass.edu
For many post-industrial city reinventing themselves in the 21st century, revitalization rests on culture and
sustainable development as central tenets. In re-making urban places, this means not only restoring the
economic opportunity city once provided, but also creating urban environments that add to the well-being of
residents and to the natural system with which they are connected regionally. In this context, culture can be
defined as an evolving continuum of spatially-rooted values and knowledge system, and the material and
immaterial expressions that emerge from these system. Cultural assets embody or yield economic value, but
also aesthetic, historical, social, spiritual and symbolic values. The stock of assets comprises historic buildings and
streetscapes as well as traditions, celebrations, music, literature, spaces, institutions and key actors in a
community through which we express our shared beliefs, customs, rituals and values . The flow of goods and
services produced from cultural capital provides a wide range of benefits for people, as individuals and as
members of the community. The introduction of a cultural context into the public planning framework makes it
possible to employ a balanced process of articulating visions and pathways for improved inclusion, security,
quality of life, and economic development based on local characteristics and resources. Although capitalizing on
the broad range of values derived from cultural assets through tourism and creative industries is gaining interest
in urban renewal strategies, initiatives are usually uncoordinated, poorly funded and not integrated into wider
agendas, and as a result, they fail to deliver the full benefits that could be realized. In order to make effective
use of cultural resources in planning and development at all levels, standard methods are needed to collect,
coordinate, and make this information available to planners, decision-makers and other entities engaged in the
city’s development. This paper describes advancements and results of a research project designed to develop an
operational framework for the integration of cultural and sustainable development planning. It involves the
development of a digital platform with a participatory component for the mapping of cultural values and assets
from the outset. This framework was deployed in Holyoke, MA, a city of varied neighborhood, layered cultures,
strong comminuty, and extraordinary industrial heritage landscapes. The paper presents the baseline
information built upon extensive documentary research and interviews within key actors and agencies, as well as
the infrastructure created for data collection and dissemination. Integrating unique cultural assets and

assessment tools, this platform provides actionable information for the city’s economic development strategy as
well as for entrepreneurs, non-profit organizations and community members. As such, it creates the ability for
collaboration using site-level information and place-based cultural data, alongside traditional statistical and
technical information commonly deployed in planning and policy-making.
References
 Hawkes, Jon. 2001. The Fourth Pillar of Sustainability: Culture’s Essential Role in Public Planning.
Common Ground Publishing in assn. with the Cultural Development Network. Melbourne, Australia. p.
35
 Throsby, David. 2000. Conceptualizing Heritage as Cultural Capital. In Heritage Economics: Challenges for
heritage conservation and sustainable development in the 21st Century.
 Creative City Network of Canada, 2010. Cultural Planning Toolkit

Abstract Index #: 24
MAPPING PATHWAYS BETWEEN URBAN environment INFORMATION, KNOWLEDGE AND ACTION
Abstract System ID#: 1265
Individual Paper
HSU, David [University of Pennsylvania] hsuyd@design.upenn.edu
This paper will present a comprehensive review of a diffuse set of literatures with respect to how information is
used directly to affect the behavior of urban citizens with respect to particular planning issues. The focus will be
on the limited case of environment data and information, though this will probably be relevant to other area
as well.
This paper examines a wide range of literature from psychology, environment policymaking, and behavioral
economics in order to examine to three fundamental planning questions: (1) by what pathways do urban citizens
access and use information?; (2) to what extent planning or other disciplines are needed to interpret information
about city?; and (3) what are new opportunities to affect these pathways to achieve planning goals?
Planners have been using computers to analyze and model city for almost as long as these technologies have
been available. The role and effectiveness of planning support system and urban models has also been long
debated and continues to evolve. Many critiques of the rational planning model also challenge the notion of
planners as value-free or disinterested information providers.
However, there has been an explosion in the amount of information available about urban life due to two
ongoing trends: the growing and pervasive nature of computing and the Internet in everyday life, as well growing
urbanization and concentration of wealth and technology in dense urban environments. This digital information
comes from many sources, including the move of many social and economic activities to the Internet; open and
administrative data movements; sensor data, including visual data that can be increasingly be recognized and
analyzed; social networks; and “data exhaust”, i.e. data generated from interactions within digital environments.
Much of this information about city is gathered, processed, and provided by sources other than planners.
Therefore, as an alternative approach to the idea of planning support system, this paper maps the flow of
information about urban environments by first starting with diagrams that begin with the information of interest,
and then how this information is transferred or flows to urban citizens. This paper then goes onto examine the
much more diffuse literature on individual understanding and decision-making with respect to environment
issues. This includes an examination of how such information affects both short-term reactions and longer-term
reasoned actions through the work of Daniel Kahneman, and how information tools can be used directly to affect
urban environment policymaking, through the work of Cass Sunstein.

References
 Brail, Richard K., ed. 2008. Planning Support system for city and Regions. Cambridge, Mass: Lincoln
Institute of Land Policy.
 Glaeser, Edward L., and Cass R. Sunstein. 2014. “Moneyball for State Regulators.” Forthcoming National
Affairs. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2418306.
 Kahneman, Daniel. 2011. Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York, NY, USA: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
 Sunstein, Cass R., and Lucia A. Reisch. 2014. “Automatically Green: Behavioral Economics and
Environmental Protection.” Harv. Envtl. L. Rev. 38: 127.
 Thaler, Richard H., and Cass R. Sunstein. 2008. Nudge. Yale University Press.

Abstract Index #: 25
MORE THAN DATA: WORKING WITH BIG DATA FOR CIVICS
Abstract System ID#: 1368
Individual Paper
WILLIAMS, Sarah [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] sew@mit.edu
It is hard to miss the idea that “Big Data” can reshape the way we live. From the analysis of medical records to
the study of traffic flows, popular media and advertising have been touting data as the solution to all of our
problems. Whether this is a vision of the future or a condition of the present, putting data to work to answer
questions is not new. In fact working with data is probably as old as the map itself, which dates to earliest
recorded history. Our relationship with data has shifted over time, often marked by innovations in technology,
such as the printing press, computers, and now mobile devices and ubiquitous sensors. Popular interest in data
waxes and wanes as our attitudes toward using rational evidence moves in and out of fashion. We have just
entered a period of renewed excitement for using data to reshape the way we live because of the unprecedented
amount of information we currently collect and store. For data enthusiasts the possibilities are exciting, however
our recent infatuation with data may need some guidance. Data does not perform simply because it exists, it is
how we put data to work that makes it relevant.
Data has the ability to simultaneously elevate some and marginalize others. The Homeowner’s Loan Insurance
maps, now famous for excluding minorities from housing loans are a great example of this duality. Data does a
great job at creating evidence, but can be easily be misunderstood or misappropriated creating consequences
that have lasting effects. This does not mean we should avoid data, but it does mean we must understand it is a
tool that can be manipulated - sometimes unknowingly. We all manipulate data to create evidence for our
interests. This is because when we work with data we make choices about what to show, collect, and analyze,
and those choices are constructed by our own view of the world.
Although data has a storied past, data can be used for civic action and policy change by communicating with it
clearly and responsibly to expose hidden patterns and ideologies to audiences inside and outside the policy
arena. Communicating with data in this way requires the ability to ask the right questions, find or collect the
appropriate data, analyze and interpret that data, and finally visualize the results in a way that can be understood
by broad audiences. Combining these methods transforms data from a simple point on a map to a narrative that
has meaning. Data is not often processed in this way, largely because data analysts are not familiar with the
techniques that can be used to tell stories with data. This article details examples where data has been
operationalized to expose issues and generate policy debates.
References
 Townsend, Anthony M. Smart city: big data, civic hackers, and the quest for a new utopia. WW Norton
& Company, 2013.
 Kitchin, Rob. "The real-time city? Big data and smart urbanism." GeoJournal79, no. 1 (2014): 1-14.
 Williams, Sarah, "Beijing Air Tracks:Tracking Data for Good" in Accountability Technologies Tools for
Asking Hard Questions, Edited by Dietmar Offenhuber, Katja Schechtner, AMBRA, Vienna, Austria [2013]




Goldstein, B., and L. Dyson. "Beyond Transparency: Open Data and the Future of Civic Innovation."
(2013).
Boyd, D., & Crawford, K. (2012). Critical questions for big data: Provocations for a cultural, technological,
and scholarly phenomenon. Information, Communication & Society, 15(5), 662-679.

Track 2: Economic Development
Abstract Index #: 26
CLUSTER AND INNOVATION: THE SELECTION MECHANISM OR THE LEARNING MECHANISM?
Abstract System ID#: 17
Individual Paper
FANG, Li [University of Maryland at College Park] kfang@umd.edu
Studies to date in general identify that clusters increase the local firms’ average innovation performances
(Baptista, 2001). However, the mechanism underlying the process is unclear. Two major mechanisms could be at
work. 1) The selection mechanism. The intensive competition in clusters selects relatively well-performed firms
by bankrupting or excavating the ill-performed ones, or prevent them from moving in (Grillitsch and Rekers,
2014). Since only the relatively well-performed firms stay, the average performance is improved. 2) The learning
mechanism. Clusters provide infrastructure, facilitate communication, create knowledge spillovers and the
competition in clusters motive firms to learn more and faster (Jacobs, 1986; Porter, 1998). As a result, every incluster firms’ innovativeness improves (although not necessarily equally). Since every firm improves its
performance, the average performance is improved. Previous studies, focusing on estimating clusters’ effects on
average innovation performance, cannot differentiate the two mechanisms, because they both increase the
average performance.
This paper attempts to differentiate between the two potential mechanisms, by focusing on estimating the
distributions instead of the means. This paper answers the following questions. 1) Which mechanism works in
high-technology clusters in the U.S.? 2) If only selection is at work, then what inhibits the learning mechanism?
What kind of firms are selected to stay in the clusters? 3) If only learning is at work, then what stops other firms
from moving into the clusters and enjoy the benefit? Who benefits more from the learning mechanism, the
relatively ill-performed firms or the well-performed ones, the small or the large firms, etc.? 4) If both mechanisms
are at work, what are their shares of contribution to improving the average innovation performances? Are the
two mechanisms independent, substitutes or complements to each other? How and why do their shares of
contribution change over cluster life cycles and across regions?
This paper uses the U.S. patent data and firm address data from the U.S. Patent office, and the firm re-location
data from NETS. This paper estimates and compares the distributions of firms’ innovation performances in
clustering regions and in non-clustering regions using the negative binomial model and non-parametric methods.
A survival model is applied to re-locating firms, exploring the determinants of the selection mechanism. A
quantile regression model is applied to in-cluster firms, exploring the determinants of the learning mechanism.
Some interviews with a few firm managers are done to further support the quantitative results and to uncover
sub-mechanisms (e.g., Do firms learn by observing and imitating other firms’ innovation results? Or do they learn
from direct information exchange? ).
By differentiating the two mechanisms, different recommendations can be made to the local authorities and to
the firms. The local authorities, who care about improving the local’s innovation performances, typically would
like to maximize the total effects of the two mechanisms. The firms, who care about improving their own
innovation performances, typically seek to maximize the effect of the learning mechanism. Since this paper
measures the two mechanisms and explores their determinants separately, it provides useful guidance for the
local authorities and firms about how to better achieve their goals.

References
 Baptista, R. (2001). Geographical clusters and innovation diffusion. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change 66 (1): 31-46.
 Grillitsch, M. and J. Rekers. (2014). Selection and cluster evolution: A conceptual and empirical
investigation using the case of Med-Tech. DRUID Society Conference paper.
 Jacobs, J. (1986). city and the wealth of nations: Penguin Harmondsworth, UK.
 Porter, M. E. (1998). Clusters and the new economics of competition: Harvard Business Review
Watertown.

Abstract Index #: 27
WHOSE CREATIVE CITY? SOCIAL EQUITY AND CULTURAL INCLUSION IN CREATIVE PLACEMAKING
Abstract System ID#: 30
Individual Paper
GOLDBERG-MILLER, Shoshanah [The Ohio State University] goldberg-miller.1@osu.edu
This paper explores the creative city movement, focusing on who is left out of this primarily urban trend. What
is the shadow side of the tremendously optimistic creative city movement? How did this trend become
globalized so quickly? The gentrification of derelict districts in the service of creating renovation and building up
anchor institutions may produce a group of alienated and angry current and former residents. If these projects
are supported in any way by the municipality, state actors working need to justify policy created and
implemented that may impact the marginalized and less fortunate community members. The challenges of
fostering inclusive urban interventions extend to issues of place, as many creative city interventions are located
in parts of the city inaccessible to the very comminuty being touted as a part of this multicultural framework.
Attention must be paid to building design, statuary, public art, and municipal branding to ensure that a
philosophy of cultural inclusion truly is embedded in all of these aspects of creative placemaking. While the idea
of cultural and ethnic festivals, arts facilities, and live work spaces for artists are appealing, do these really
contribute to the vibrancy of neighborhood and districts? What about class issues in the creative city discourse?
This article first describes the winners and losers in the creative city context, then examines root causes of this
win/lose dichotomy that often results from creative placemaking, even as it is introduced to provide a ‘solution’
in urban area with crumbling city centers. I investigate which groups are marginalized, including those with
lower socioeconomic status, artists outside of the predominant norm, gays and lesbians, and those attempting
creative placemaking in smaller city. While municipal actors concern themselves with issues including livability
in order to make their city more attractive, implementing the tool of arts and culture may leave numerous
residents and marginalized groups out of this conversation altogether.
The creative city movement has traveled fast, and policy that cultivate these initiatives have been adopted in
numerous urban area. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, many city turned to creative placemaking in efforts to
incorporate tools to revitalize their urban cores, many times where the poorest and most marginalized residents
resided. Downtown development and renovation often served to reimagine and rebuild these decrepit area, and
issues such as economic disparity and racial inequality often were left out of these efforts at transformation.
Branding a city through creative placemaking incorporates the issues of livability, urban_planning, economic
development and employment opportunities. Among these multifaceted concerns, the creative city discourse has
begun to reexamine the underlying frameworks that stem from the use of arts and culture to draw in new
residents, businesses and tourists. Economic development actors in city throughout the world have found that
fostering creative city interventions has contributed to their goals and ensured the success of their city. city
want to grow, and many municipal stakeholders feel that if they foster an environment in which creativity can
occur, this will lead to further growth and development. This vision of an expanded role for culture and creativity
in city now needs to re-examine the underlying assumptions that may lead to the detriment of this movement. I
discuss how the global creative city phenomenon migrated so quickly and look at why some groups have been
favored. I present considerations for an agenda that calls for increased inclusiveness, and conclude with models

for closing the winner/loser gap and a discussion of the remaining disconnects, as well as suggestions on ways to
include previously marginalized comminuty in the creative placemaking conversation.
References
 Markusen, A. (2014). Creative city: A 10-year research agenda. Journal of Urban Affairs, 36(S2), 567589.
 McCann, E. (2013). Policy Boosterism, Policy Mobilities, and the Extrospective City. Urban Geography,
34(1), 5-29.
 Peck, J. (2005). Struggling with the Creative Class. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research,
29(4), 740-770.
 Boren, T. & Young, C. (2013). Getting creative with the ‘creative city’? Towards new perspectives on
creativity in urban policy. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 37(5), 1799-1815.
 Catungal, J. P., Leslie, D., & Hii, Y. (2009). Geographies of displacement in the creative city: The case of
Liberty Village, Toronto. Urban Studies, 46(5-6), 1095-1114.

Abstract Index #: 28
THE DARK SIDE OF THE SERVICE/EXPERIENCE ECONOMIES: EXAMINING THE SPATIAL CONFIGURATION OF
SEXUALLY ORIENTED MASSAGE PARLORS IN LOS ANGELES AND NEW YORK CITY
Abstract System ID#: 69
Individual Paper
TAKAHASHI, Lois [UCLA] takahash@ucla.edu, presenting author, primary author
CHIN, John [Hunter College] john.chin@hunter.cuny.edu
WIEBE, Douglas [University of Pennsylvania] dwiebe@exchange.upenn.edu
Background: Scholars have argued that contemporary economic growth is related to an expanding “experience
economy”, where goods and services are not only exchanged, but in addition, they are “staged” for enhanced
experiential value to the consumer (Pine and Gilmore 1998). Sex work has increasingly taken on such dimensions
as it has moved from the streets into indoor venues, such as massage parlors; the growth of the sexually oriented
massage parlor industry is traced to heightened enforcement of anti-prostitution ordinances (making street
based sex work more difficult) and because of the internet (making customer searching of workers and parlors
easier). Indoor sex work is now the predominant mode in the industry in the US (Sanders et al. 2009), and such
firms predominantly employ immigrant female sex workers, especially Asians (Lever et al. 2005). Though there
has been policy concern around sexually oriented massage parlors (Dank et al 2014) and an important literature
on “red light districts” (e.g., Hubbard and Whowell 2008), scholars still have inadequate understanding of the
industry’s current spatial configurations and the locales in urban environments where massage parlors operate.
Method: Using geocoded data from a masseuse rating website including businesses in Los Angeles County and
New York City, we conducted spatial and regression analyses of sexually oriented massage parlor location to
identify (1) spatial clustering; (2) differences between Los Angeles County and New York City; and (3)
demographic and economic factors associated with clustering.
Conclusions: The results show that sexually oriented massage parlors cluster in particular Census tracts in distinct
geographic enclaves. Clustering was positively associated with Census tracts with more employees and with
higher proportions of adult males, Asian residents, unemployed persons, and households below the poverty line.
Clustering was negatively associated with Census tracts with higher average family size and proportion of
women. Furthermore, clustering patterns for LA County and NYC were significantly different. Alternative
explanations for these patterns are discussed.
References
 Dank M, Khan B, Downey PM, Kotonias C, Mayer D, Owens C, Pacifici L, Yu L. Estimating the Size and
Structure of the Underground Commercial Sex Economy in Eight Major US city. Washington, DC: Urban






Institute. March 2014. Available at: http://www.urban.org/UploadedPDF/413047-UndergroundCommercial-Sex-Economy.pdf. Downloaded 21 July 2014.
Hubbard P, Whowell M. Revisiting the red light district: still neglected, immoral and marginal?
Geoforum. 2008;39(5):1743-1755. doi:10.1016/j.geoforum.2008.05.003
Lever J, Kanouse DE, Berry SH. Racial and ethnic segmentation of female prostitution in Los Angeles
County. Journal of Psychology & Human Sexuality. 2005;17(1/2):107-129.
Pine, B. Joseph, and James H. Gilmore. Welcome to the experience economy. Harvard business review
76 (1998): 97-105.
Sanders T, O'Neill M, Pitcher J. Prostitution: sex work, policy and politics. London: Sage; 2009.

Abstract Index #: 29
BLOOM AND EQUALITY: EVALUATE THE ROLE OF THE ARTIST AND THE PLACE IN THE PROCESS OF ARTS
DISTRICT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Abstract System ID#: 118
Individual Paper
YAO, Lingyan [TONGJI UNIVERSITY] lingyanyao529@gmail.com
Arts districts play an important role in old district revitalization and urban economy promotion, and such, are
places where creative commons and innovation can occur. But it also form a typical development path model
that artists cluster will become more and more commercial after several years, then follow with the leaving of
artists and lost of creative power. What would happened after that? Does its economy decline or keep a
sustainable boom? Some literatures argue that artists and other creative people are the core to push and keep
clusters’ thrive.Their leaving leads to debase the real creative and high value-added portion. Others suggest that
place which contains social, cultural and cultural industry network context will attractive investment to maintain
its economy prosperity. Artist or Place, which have played or will play the key role for Arts District's economy
creation. Is the value distribution equal to artist who have to leave their cluster?
Better knowledge of how artists and space change interact with cultural cluster's economy development is
particularly necessary, because over last decades, the different focus deeply affect policy target for Art District,
even the other kind of creative cultural clusters. We attempt to address the dearth of artists and place efforts of
clusters economy development by qualitatively and statistically testing the relationship of the artists, place, and
its economy value at different stages. Base on the value increasing and distribution to analysis its bloom reason
and equality status. We focus on a typical artist cluster — “TianZIFang” in china, with its economy Survey data
and development process records to study how artists and place context are associated with a set of six
dimensions indicative of local economy development.
The find suggests that, with multiple economy growing, the artists cluster has gradually developed to a core area
of cultural industry which link the market and the creative point of its network. The original Information Nod Role
of Artists has been replaced by Space. Although Artists no longer occupied dominant role in the cluster’s
economy development for the future, the really driving force of the artist’s leave is the unfair distribution of
value.
References
 Florida R. The rise of the creative class and how it’s transforming work, leisure, community and everyday
life (Paperback Ed.)[J]. 2004.
 Scott A J. The cultural economy of city: essays on the geography of image-producing industries[M].
Sage, 2000.
 Grodach C. Art spaces in community and economic development: Connections to neighborhood, artists,
and the cultural economy[J]. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 2011, 31(1): 74-85.
 Waitt G, Gibson C. Creative small city: Rethinking the creative economy in place[J]. Urban studies,
2009, 46(5-6): 1223-1246.
 Pratt A C. The state of the cultural economy: the rise of the cultural economy and the challenges to
cultural policy making[M]. Carcanet Press/Gulbenkin Foundation, 2007.

Abstract Index #: 30
GEOGRAPHIC, TEMPORAL, AND INDUSTRIAL VARIATIONS IN STARTUPS FROM 1990-2010: A COMPARATIVE
ANALYSIS
Abstract System ID#: 158
Pre-organized Session: Innovation, Entrepreneurship and Economic Development
CREDIT, Kevin [Arizona State University] kcredit@asu.edu, presenting author
MACK, Elizabeth [Arizona State University] eamack1@asu.edu, primary author
KELLEY, Scott [Arizona State University] sbkelley@asu.edu
Entrepreneurship is a critical driver of regional economic development (Carree and Thurik 2003). By capitalizing
on knowledge created in large research universities or companies, entrepreneurs foster innovation and create
jobs, which bolster the local economy. In addition, these innovative firms can contribute to specialized business
clusters, which convey benefits to all of the firms in a local area by fostering increased competition and regional
competitiveness (Malmberg and Maskell 2002).
Research at the regional level has begun to unravel some of the factors behind the uneven distribution of
entrepreneurial activity (cites). Recent case study work has also revealed the role of large businesses as anchor
institutions in fostering entrepreneurial activity in second-tier regions (Mayer 2011). Comparative work using
establishment data has also analyzed new firm survival trends across urban, suburban, and rural area (Renski
2008). Much work remains to understand geographic, temporal, and industrial variations in startup activities,
particularly in a comparative context outside area such as Silicon Valley and Route 128 in Boston (Saxenian
1996).
Given the need for additional comparative work on entrepreneurship trends, particularly at the intrametropolitan level, this paper will use point-level resolution establishment data to analyze geographic, temporal,
and industrial variation in new business activity within and between metropolitan area. This analysis will answer
the following research questions:
1. Are temporal trends in new business activity context (metropolitan area) -specific?
2. How have macro-level business cycles (particularly the dot-com bubble and the housing crisis) influenced
temporal fluctuations in new business activity? Are the effects short or long-term in nature?
3. Are there industrial trends in startup activity across metropolitan area?
4. Does startup activity cluster within metropolitan area, and, if so, where?
5. Which area have seen the most significant clustering of new businesses – has the ‘back to the city’ movement
influenced patterns of startup locations?
An important aspect of this paper is that it compares several of the most highly-visible regional startup clusters,
such as Silicon Valley and the Research Triangle in Raleigh-Durham, with other second-tier metros in order to
better understand the relative importance of those regions’ unique advantages vs. national macro-economic
trends. As planners nationwide take steps to foster locally grown businesses, which is an attractive alternative to
expensive industrial recruitment economic development strategies, this study will provide important information
about trends in new business activity within metropolitan area. These trends are important for planners and
economic developers to better understand the effects of the national economy on the localized development
patterns of city. It may also provide insight on how the urban structure of different regions influences
entrepreneurship and the clustering of different kinds of businesses.
References
 Carree, M.A. and A.R. Thurik. 2003. “The Impact of Entrepreneurship on Economic Growth.” Handbook
of Entrepreneurship Research, edited by Z.J. Acs and D.B. Audretsch, 437-471.
 Malmberg, A. and P. Maskell. 2002. “The Elusive Concept of Localization Economies: Towards a
Knowledge-Based Theory of Spatial Clustering.” Environment and Planning 34(3): 429-449.





Mayer, Heike. 2011. Entrepreneurship and innovation in second tier regions. Edward Elgar Publishing.
Renski, H. 2008. “New firm entry, survival, and growth in the United States: A comparison of urban,
suburban, and rural area.” Journal of the American Planning Association 75(1): 60-77.
Saxenian, A. 1996. Regional advantage. Harvard University Press.

Abstract Index #: 31
A SURVIVABILITY ANALYSIS OF WOMEN'S HIGH TECH VENTURES
Abstract System ID#: 162
Pre-organized Session: Innovation, E’ship & Economic Development II
PIERRE, Lisa-Marie [Arizona State University] lisa-marie.pierre@asu.edu, presenting author
MACK, Elizabeth [Arizona State University] eamack1@asu.edu, primary author
The majority of women entrepreneurs start ventures in the service and retail industries (Brush, Carter,
Gatewood, Greene, & Hart, 2004; Kelley, Brush, Greene, & Litovsky, 2013; Loscocco & Robinson, 1991; Smith,
Smit, & Hoy, 1992). Although women are beginning to start technology-related ventures (Brush et al., 2004), the
technology industry is male-dominated and women high tech entrepreneurs are spatially concentrated in Silicon
Valley (Mayer, 2008). Previous research on women high tech entrepreneurs focus on spatial segmentation
(Mayer, 2008), financial institutional support, (Brush et al., 2004), and comparisons to men high tech
entrepreneurs (Robb &Coleman). Given the current literature on women high-tech firms, more research is
needed to understand business survival and spatial variations in women-high tech firm survival rates. Research
on high-tech firms, highlights that women gravitate towards specific types of businesses within the high-tech
sector (Mayer, 2008). For example, women high-tech entrepreneurs gravitate towards software publishing,
design services, management and consulting services, telecommunication, and research services within the hightech sector (Mayer, 2008). Prior work on women’s high tech ventures finds that venture survival is related to
prior work experience, external markets, and education (Boden & Nucci, 2000; Gatewood, Brush, Carter, Greene,
& Hart, 2009). A high tech firm also has increased chances of survival in suburbs and small city than urban cores
and rural metro area, though advanced services grow quickly in urban cores (Renski, 2008). Much more work
remains to understand the women that pursue high-tech ventures, the types of ventures they create, and the
regional factors that enhance the survivability of these ventures.
The purpose of this paper is to design a conceptual framework that outlines the factors that impact high-tech
ventures started by women. It will also use information from the Kauffman Firm Survey to collect information
about high-tech venture characteristics as well as firm-level and regional characteristics that impact their
survivability. This analysis will answer the following questions:
1.
What are the characteristics of women who create high-tech ventures?
2.
In which high-tech sectors are women started ventures most and least common?
3.
What is the survival time of women’s high-tech ventures and is their spatial variation in this survival
period?
To the factors that impact the survival of women’s high-tech ventures, multi-level models that consider individual
firm and regional characteristics will be constructed using two sources of data, the Kauffman Firm Survey (KFS)
data and regional information from County Business Patterns, the U.S. Census Bureau, the Bureau of Economic
Analysis, and the U.S. Department of Agriculture. High-technology ventures will be defined using the NAICS
industry codes outlined in Mayer (2008) and Robb (2010).
These models will provide important information about the factors that impact the survivability of women’s hightech ventures. This information is important for planners because economic development initiatives nationwide
are increasingly emphasizing new ventures as a source of business diversity and job growth. The pace of
technological change has also placed an emphasis on technology-oriented businesses, which means wider
participation of women in starting these ventures is vital to regional competitiveness. In this respect, information

about regional factors that impact high-tech venture survivability will help economic development planners
understand factors which can be emphasized to improve the business climate for women’s high-tech ventures.
References
 Renski, H. (2008). New firm entry, survival, and growth in the United States: A comparison of urban,
suburban, and rural area. Journal of the American Planning Association, 75(1), 60-77.
 Mayer, H. (2008). Segmentation and segregation patterns of women-owned high-tech firms in four
metropolitan regions in the United States. Regional Studies, 42(10), 1357-1383.
 Robb, A. M., & Coleman, S. (2010). Financing strategies of new technology-based firms: A comparison of
women-and men-owned firms. Journal of technology management & innovation, 5(1), 30-50.
 Smith, P. L., Smits, S. J., & Hoy, F. (1992). Female business owners in industries traditionally dominated
by males. Sex Roles, 26(11-12), 485-496.
 Boden, R.J. & Nucci, A. (2000). On the survival prospects of men’s and women’s new business ventures.
Journal of Business Venturing, 15(4), 347-362.

Abstract Index #: 32
PLANT CLOSURE, ORGANIZATIONAL DEMISE AND COMMUNITY ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Abstract System ID#: 184
Pre-organized Session: Innovation, Entrepreneurship and Economic Development
RENSKI, Henry [University of Massachusetts Amherst] hrenski@larp.umass.edu
The closure of a major employer can have devastating  impact on a community. Lost paychecks wreak havoc on
the lives of layoff victims, producing serious public policy consequences that are emblemized by boarded-up
factories and crowded unemployment offices. comminuty often find themselves often straddled between
shrinking tax revenues and increased demand for services. These issues have been extremely prevalent in recent
years. Since 2003, more than 5,000 manufacturing facilities across the US have been shuttered
(www.plantclosingnews.com; site accessed 1/16/2014), and bankruptcy declarations have increased dramatically
in recent years. However, some scholars point to potentially constructive outcomes of organizational demise.
When organizations close, new entrepreneurial ventures rise up in its wake. For example, the closure of Maytag
in Newton, Iowa in 2006 has spurred on a new generation of entrepreneurial ventures by former employees and
community members.
This study seeks to better understand community entrepreneurial responses, by documenting changes in the
level and composition of new firm creation following a large plant closure. Do we see an increase in new firm
creation in similar and related industries following the closure of a major employer? Scholars have argued that
the effects of organizational decline on innovation may be positive or negative depending on certain
environmental, organizational, and individual-level variables (Mone, McKinley, & Barker, 1998). Thus, we expect
to find considerable spatial heterogeneity in the degree of entrepreneurial response. We seek to explain this
place variability--asking why some comminuty exhibit more resilience in the face of organizational demise
through entrepreneurial activity than others?
Our approach is mainly quantitative and longitudinal. We focus on rural and small urban counties that fall outside
of major metropolitan economies. These are likely to be more sensitive to the  impact of discrete plant closures.
We track each over time, compiling information on plant closures, new firm starts, industry composition, and
other community characteristics from a variety of secondary data sources. We estimate a quasi-experimental /
interrupted time-series model to isolate the impact of large plant closures on new firm formation from other
competing causes. We then estimate a panel regression model to isolate the contributions of individual variables
on the degree of community entrepreneurial response.

Abstract Index #: 33
AGGLOMERATION ECONOMIES AND DISECONOMIES IN THE CONTEXT OF CHINESE URBANIZATION: ROLES OF
POPULATION AND MIGRATION IN FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT LOCATION
Abstract System ID#: 231
Individual Paper
HUANG, Hao [Illinois Institute of Technology] hzchh21@gmail.com
Agglomeration economies, a form of externalities and scale economies, have been well known as one of
fundamental explanations of industrial location (Marshall, 1920; Henderson, 1974; Jacobs, 1969; Krugman, 1991).
Urbanization economy is one of agglomeration economies influencing foreign direct investment (FDI) location,
which is related to a city size (Jacobs, 1969; Henderson, 1974). The identification and examination of
microfoundations of agglomeration can help understand the process and mechanisms behind the behavior of FDI
location. With China’s rapid urbanization, urbanization agglomeration effects are playing increasingly significant
roles in foreign direct investment (FDI) location. China’s rapid urbanization has been considered as an important
force shaping the world development in the twenty-first century, but the impact of urbanization economies on
FDI has not been thoroughly identified in the context of Chinese urbanization, especially in the 2000s. Further,
existing studies on FDI location in the context of Chinese urbanization fail to distinguish urbanization
agglomeration effects stemming from different urbanization processes: the increase of urban-hukou population
and the migration.
This paper employs two sets of population data from two system for the collection and reporting of statistical
data, China City Statistical Yearbooks generated from the hukou registration statistics and China Censuses
including migrant workers, to distinguish urbanization agglomeration effects resulting from two different
urbanization processes. The results indicate that the urbanization agglomeration stemming from two different
urbanization processes had opposite effects on FDI location: the urbanization agglomeration economies resulting
from the increase of the urban-hukou population and the urbanization agglomeration diseconomies resulting
from the migration. The findings provide policy implications on developing periphery city to motivate and
encourage migrant workers to move from core city within the economic zones and provincial capitals, especially
cities in the eastern/coastal regions, to the periphery city.
References
 Henderson, J. V. 1974. The sizes and types of city. The American Economic Review, 64 (4), pp. 640-656.
 Jacobs, J. (1969). The Economy of city. Vintage, New York.
 Krugman, P. (1991). Increasing Returns and Economic Geography. The Journal of Political Economy,
99(3), 483-499.
 Marshall, A. (1920). Principles of Economics. Macmillan, London.

Abstract Index #: 34
FROM RESOURCE MUNIFICENCE TO LOCAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP ECOSYSTEM
Abstract System ID#: 279
Pre-organized Session: Innovation, Entrepreneurship and Economic Development
MOTOYAMA, Yasuyuki [Kauffman Foundation] ymotoyama@kauffman.org
Government sponsorship has become a popular policy tool in the last fifteen years, and has been implemented
by virtually every state government and a number of city governments (OECD, 2013). The rationale for such
action is to create resource munificence whereas resource-scarce small or new firms could allocate their capital
to their core competency. Incubators and public venture funds are the most typical of this approach.
Despite the popularity, the past academic studies have given mixed results for the evaluation of government
sponsorship. For instance, Amezcua et al. (2013) observed that the general effect of incubators was marginal, as
incubated firms survived better, but died more quickly after they graduated. However, additional services

provided by incubators, such as networking efforts, could improve the effect, and it also depended on the
condition of the market environment and firm density. Among all studies, Lerner (2009) has been most
pessimistic, by concluding that the selection process of public venture funds was so politicized that the public or
semi-public sector could not choose firms based on the potential from the economic and market-based
perspective.
We identify the major limitation of the past studies because their analysis overwhelmingly relied on the firm-level
performance data, most notably the firm survival rate, and at best the employment and revenue growth rate.
Such analysis treated the effects of government sponsorship in isolation and neglected the complex mechanism
that government sponsorship can engage within the context of social and economic relations surrounding the
sponsored firms. This becomes particularly a problem when the objectives of the public sector are not only to
increase the micro-level survival or growth rate of supported firms, but also to enhance the macro-level
entrepreneurial environment of the region. We all know that firms, particularly startup firms, do not survive and
grow in isolation, but cohabitate with various entrepreneurship supporters, such as research universities, venture
capitals, non-profit support services and for-profit professional services, the highly skilled workforce, and even
broader social capital (Feldman, 2001; Neck et al. 2004).
We conduct a case study in St. Louis in which the coalition of the public, non-profit, and private actors
established the Arch Grants which provides $50,000 to 20 winners of their annual startup competition. Here, the
resource munificence is minimal, particularly considering the team-oriented nature of startup firms. Based on
interviews of 35 recipient firms and 10 support organizations, we first demonstrate that the government
sponsorship can create a cohort of entrepreneurs where they can learn from each other about businesses,
mentors, resources, and other networks. Second, the government sponsorship can facilitate to integrate local
entrepreneurship support resources. In our case, the recipient companies were located at the semi-incubator
facility where a local non-profit organization purchased an unused retail space. Furthermore, other support
organizations, accelerators, and venture capitals co-located, helped to create the interaction among those
support organizations and local startup firms, and streamlined the development of startup firms at various stages
of entrepreneurship. Thus, we conclude that the government sponsorship can play a role to integrate various
actors involving the local entrepreneurship, and its evaluation should go beyond the traditional firm-level
performance measurement.
References
 Amezcua, A. S., Grimes, M. G., Bradley, S. W. & Wiklund, J. (2013). Organizational sponsorship and
founding environments: A contingency view on the survival of business-incubated firms, 1994-2007.
Academy of Management Journal, 56, 1628-1654
 Feldman, M. (2001). The entrepreneurial event revisited: Firm formation in a regional context. Industrial
and Corporate Change, 10, 861-891.
 Lerner, J. (2009). Boulevard of broken dreams: Why public efforts to boost entrepreneurship and
venture capital have failed and what to do about it. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
 Neck, H. M., Meyer, G. D., Cohen, B. & Corbett, A. (2004). An entrepreneurial system view of new
venture creation. Journal of Small Business Management, 42, 190-208.
 OECD. (2013). An international benchmarking analysis of public programmes for high-growth firms.
Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.

Abstract Index #: 35
DOES GENTRIFICATION INCREASE EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES IN LOW-INCOME neighborhood?
Abstract System ID#: 284
Individual Paper
MELTZER, Rachel [Milano, The New School] meltzerr@newschool.edu, presenting author, primary author
GHORBANI, Pooya [The New School] ghorp982@newschool.edu

Gentrification is a term often associated with displacement and other negative byproducts of affluent in-movers
altering the economic and demographic composition of a neighborhood. Empirical research on neighborhood
change, however, has produced no conclusive evidence that incumbent residents are in fact displaced under
circumstances of gentrification. The question is then, do these incumbent residents benefit from the economic
and social changes that accompany gentrification? In this paper, we focus on low-income neighborhood
undergoing economic transitions (i.e. gentrification) and test whether or not the potential benefits from these
changes stay within the community, in the form of employment opportunities for local residents.
The impact on employment opportunities for local residents is ambiguous. In the case where economic change
brings in new and/or more local businesses, nearby existing residents will have the benefit of more information
and lower search costs. All else equal, they should see more local employment opportunities—essentially a
reversal of the spatial mismatch phenomenon. On the other hand, should neighborhood economic upgrading
bring in new retailers that more productively use the existing commercial space or who exploit farther-reaching
hiring networks (chains, for example), local existing residents, with potentially lower skill sets and smaller
networks, will not be as competitively positioned for these jobs.
In order to test these predictions, we build a dataset that tracks the universe of neighborhood in New York City
for nearly a decade (2002-2011) with information on business turnover and contraction/expansion over time,
demographic, economic, fiscal and built environment characteristics, and employment and demographics of the
local resident labor pool. We compare changes in local employment across low-income neighborhood
experiencing gentrification and those that are more stagnant or economically declining.
Our preliminary results suggest that gentrifying neighborhood on average do not experience consistent,
meaningful gains in local employment, compared to other comparable low-income neighborhood that are not
undergoing economic upgrading. There is some weak evidence that, as a share of all jobs in the census tract, the
number of local jobs decreases under circumstances of gentrification. At larger geographies (i.e. ZIP codes),
however, the number of jobs going to local residents increases, and these jobs are primarily going to low-earners.
Stratified models indicate that any local job gains are concentrated in neighborhood with initially longer
commute times for their workers (for both tract and ZIP analyses) and in tract neighborhood with higher
unemployment rates; both of these findings suggest that gentrification is perhaps helping to fill an initial
employment gap. Analyses at larger ZIP geographies, however, show that neighborhood with higher initial
unemployment rates witness drops in the number of local jobs; these results could be obscuring variation at finer
geographies, though. These preliminary findings are encouraging in that any change in local economic conditions
could be a remedy for employment mismatches. The lack of consistent positive effects, however, raises concerns
that incumbent lower-income residents are not reaping enough benefits from changing economic circumstances.
References
 Lester, T. William, and Daniel A. Hartley. 2014. "The long term employment  impact of gentrification in
the 1990s." Regional Science and Urban Economics, 45: 80-89.
 Meltzer, R., Schuetz, J., 2012. Bodegas or Bagel Shops? Neighborhood Differences in Retail & Household
Services. Economic Development Quarterly 26: 0891242411430328.
 Curran, Winifred. "Gentrification and the nature of work: exploring the links in Williamsburg, Brooklyn."
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING A. 36 (2004): 1243-1258.
 Kolko, J., 2009. Job Location, Neighborhood Change, and Gentrification. Public Policy Institute of
California working paper.
 Sullivan, Daniel Monroe, and Samuel C. Shaw. 2011. "Retail gentrification and race: The case of Alberta
Street in Portland, Oregon." Urban Affairs Review, 47(3): 413-432.

Abstract Index #: 36
THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT - VIBRANT CENTER CONNECTION
Abstract System ID#: 330
Pre-organized Session: Innovation, Entrepreneurship and Economic Development

MALIZIA, Emil [University of North Carolina] malizia@email.unc.edu, presenting author, primary author
MOTOYAMA, Yasuyuki [Kauffman Foundation] ymotoyama@kauffman.org
The long-term dominance of suburban area may be coming to an end. Economic development in the decades
ahead may be spawned in urban area and especially in vibrant centers - live, work, play environments. This
analysis tracks the location of privately held firms expereincing very high growth in recent years. The follow the
spatial distribution of employment within metro area but are concentrated more heavily in vibrant centers.
References
 M. Feldman 2001 The entrepreneurial event revisited, Industrial & Corporate Change
 W. Frey 2014 Will this be the decade of urban growth? Brookings
 E. Glaeser 2007 Entrrepreneurship and the city
 J. Jacobs 1969 The economy of city
 NAIOP 2014 Preferred office locations

Abstract Index #: 900
INNOVATION DISTRICTS: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INNOVATION OR SHINY NEW BOTTLE?
Abstract System ID#: 345
Pre-organized Session: Innovation, Entrepreneurship and Economic Development
DRUCKER, Joshua [University of Illinois Chicago] jdruck@uic.edu
KASS, Amanda [University of Illinois Chicago] akass@uic.edu
Innovation districts are fast gaining attention as a new strategy in urban economic development, perhaps
becoming an incipient fad. They have been promoted energetically by the Brookings Institution’s Bruce Katz
among others (Katz and Bradley 2013; Katz 2014) and buoyed by the ostensible successes of early adopters
Barcelona and Boston. As additional city in the United States and worldwide move to establish and promote
innovation districts, it is important to consider whether they represent a potentially effective and valuable
approach in economic development.
What are the distinguishing features or characteristics of innovation districts? Do innovation districts present a
substantive advancement in economic development policy, or are they more appropriately interpreted as efforts
to recombine or advertise conventional policy under a more contemporary rubric? Must they be planned or
can innovation districts arise without intentional public action? How can we evaluate their promise regarding the
aims of fostering innovation, entrepreneurship, and economic dynamism?
Because nearly all existing innovation districts are immature, it is not yet feasible to conduct rigorous empirical
analyses of their performance. Therefore, we address the questions raised around innovation districts by
concentrating on three tasks. (1) We establish and justify a precise definition of innovation districts and identify
their characteristic features, with reference to existing and proposed examples in the United States and
elsewhere (Barnett et al. 2014). Given the current ambiguity of the term in practice, this is a crucial step for
understanding the strategy and being able to assess its originality. (2) We evaluate the merit of innovation
districts with respect to theories and current understandings of the spatial aspects of innovation and
entrepreneurship (e.g., Shearmur and Bonnet 2011; Audretsch and Pena-Legazkue 2012). To what extent does
the design of innovation districts correspond with conceptions of productive regional innovation processes?
(Cooke 2002) (3) We present and preliminarily defend our judgment as to whether innovation districts are likely
to be effective in advancing regional economic development goals.
References
 Audretsch, D. B., and I. Pena-Legazkue. 2012. Entrepreneurial activity and regional competitiveness: An
introduction to the special issue. Small Business Economics, 39 (3): 531-537. doi: 10.1007/s11187-0119328-5.








Barnett, B., J. Benedetti, C. Fahey, A. Leza, and A. Linares. 2014. All Smoke, No Fire? A Critical
Evaluation of Innovation Districts. Prepared for World Business Chicago. Class report, Planning for
Innovation, University of Illinois at Chicago, Professor Joshua Drucker. May 8.
Cooke, P. 2002. Biotechnology clusters as regional, sectoral innovation system. International Regional
Science Review, 25 (1): 8-37.
Katz, B., and J. Bradley. 2013. The Metropolitan Revolution. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
and Katz, B. 2014. Innovation districts catch on. Available at http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/theavenue/posts/2014/08/05-innovation-districts-catch-on (accessed October 13, 2014).
Shearmur, R. G., and N. Bonnet. 2011. Does local technological innovation lead to local development?
A policy perspective. Regional Science Policy and Practice, 3 (3): 249-270. doi: 10.1111/j.17577802.2011.01040.x.

Abstract Index #: 37
GREEN JOBS AND GREEN LOCATIONS
Abstract System ID#: 437
Individual Paper
PARK, Jeong Il [Korea Research Institute for Human Settlements] jip@krihs.re.kr, presenting author, primary
author
LEIGH, Nancey Green [Georgia Institute of Technology] ngleigh@coa.gatech.edu
LEE, Sugie [Hanyang University] sugielee@hanyang.ac.kr
Green economy and green jobs are important components for sustainable economic development. Recent
studies address the definition of green jobs and identify their economic impact (Chapple et al, 2011; Yi, 2013). In
addition, policy makers increasingly seek to encourage the creation of green jobs for sustainable economic
development. However, very few studies attempt to examine spatial patterns of green jobs, in particular, in the
metropolitan area. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics at the U.S. Department of Labor, green jobs are
defined as “jobs in businesses that produce goods or provide service that benefit the environment or conserve
natural resources.” Although this definition is intended to address the output of the green jobs, it does not
consider their locational factors that may affect the environment.
Using a longitudinal firm-level data from the National Establishment Time-Series (NETS) dataset 1990-2010, we
examine the spatial patterns of green jobs and their dynamic changes over time within the Atlanta metropolitan
area. Specifically, we examine whether green jobs slow greenfield consumption, reuse previously developed
properties and vacant land, and promote job-housing proximity. The Atlanta Regional Commission’s LandPro
Database allow us to explore whether the green jobs tend to locate in greenfield sites in rural area or otherwise
undeveloped land at the outskirts of the metropolitan area, or to choose brownfield sites or industrial and office
property reuse sites within urban core area.
The expected results demonstrate whether green jobs are located in green locations in a metropolitan area. We
discuss spatial characteristics of green job locations and suggest policy implications for green industries.
References
 Chapple, K., Kroll, C., Lester, T. W., and Montero, S. (2011). Innovation in the Green Economy: An
Extension of the Regional Innovation System Model? Economic Development Quarterly, 25(1), 5-25.
 Fitzgerald, J., & Leigh, N. G. (2002). Economic Revitalization : Cases and Strategies for City and Suburb.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publication.
 U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2010). Measuring Green Jobs. Access March 01,
2014 http://www.bls.gov/green/
 Yi, Hongtao, (2013). Clean energy policy and green jobs: An evaluation of green jobs in U.S.
metropolitan area. Energy Policy, 56, 644-652.

Abstract Index #: 38
ARE AMERICA’S INNER city COMPETITIVE? EVIDENCE FROM THE 2000S
Abstract System ID#: 476
Individual Paper
LESTER, Thomas William [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] twlester@unc.edu, presenting author,
primary author
KAZA, Nikhil [University of north carollna] nkaza@unc.edu
HARTLEY, Daniel [Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland] daniel.hartley@clev.frb.org
In the years since Michael Porter’s seminal paper about the potential competitiveness of inner city, two
narratives have emerged about the overall pattern of urban economic development. The first, which we call the
“comeback city” narrative, states that the decades of the 1990s and 2000s were a renaissance for city as flows
of population, jobs and investment shifted back from suburbs and ex-urbs to urban area, particularly
downtowns (Grogan & Proscio, 2000; Sohmer & Lang, 2001). The second narrative that has taken shape is that of
uneven geography of growth in the last few decades. Morretii’s New Geography of Jobs (2012) and the literature
on high-technology regions argues that contemporary US economic development has taken on a distinctly
uneven pattern that leads to a polarization between so-called “innovative” regions and “backward” regions,
which in turn drives inequality and a divergence in outcomes across metropolitan area (Morretti, 2012; Pastor,
Lester, & Scoggins, 2009; Saxenian, 1994). The implication of this second narrative is that the type of inner-city
renaissance described in the first narrative will only occur in growing, innovative regional economies. However,
is this necessarily the case? Can inner-city economic growth occur in down-market regions? Is the type of
consumption-based growth that is fueled by gentrification in growing regions like New York or the Bay-area, the
only mechanism to bring jobs back to urban neighborhood? In this paper, we explore these inter-twined
narratives by describing the pattern of neighborhood based employment changes at a national scale. We
document the trends in net employment growth and find that inner city gained over 1.8 million jobs between
2002 and 2011 at a rate comparable to suburban area. We also find a significant number of regions have inner
cities that are competitive over this period—increasing their share of metropolitan employment in 120 out of 281
MSAs. We also explore the determinants of job growth within the inner city, finding that tracts that grew faster
tended to be closer to downtown, with access to transit, and adjacent to area with higher population growth.
However, tracts with higher poverty rates experienced less job growth, indicating that barriers still exist in the
inner city.
References
 Porter, M. E. (1997). New strategies for inner-city economic development. Economic Development
Quarterly, 11(1), 11-27
 Sohmer, R. R., & Lang, R. E. (2001). Downtown rebound. Redefining Urban and Suburban America:
Evidence From Census 2000, 1, 63-74.
 Grogan, P. S., & Proscio, T. (2000). Comeback city: A blueprint for urban neighborhood revival: Basic
Books.
 Morretti, E. (2012). The New Geography of Jobs. New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
 Pastor, M., Lester, T. W., & Scoggins, J. (2009). WHY REGIONS? WHY NOW? WHO CARES? Journal of
Urban Affairs, 31(3), 269-296.

Abstract Index #: 39
THE MARKET IS ALWAYS SHIFTING: UNDERSTANDING THE FINANCING OF THE CURRENT REAL ESTATE BOOMS
IN BOSTON AND SAN DIEGO
Abstract System ID#: 497
Individual Paper
WISSOKER, Peter [Cornell University] pw87@cornell.edu

Since the collapse of the housing market in 2008 select city throughout the United States have seen a return of
real estate prices to 2007 levels. If the lenders and investors who lost money in the crash are adopting a new,
more cautious approach to investment, and the issuance rate of commercial mortgage-backed securities is only
at 2003 levels, then how do we explain this phenomenon? Taking a modified institutional approach (Ball, 2006;
Pryke, 1994; Henneberry and Rowley, 2002), this paper uses an analysis of investment patterns in Boston and San
Diego, along with interviews with investors and developers, to gain insight into these recent growth spurts.
Particular importance is put on sources of capital, the relationships between different institutional actors in the
development process, and the tendency of particular sources of capital to follow particular logics of investment
and risk assumption. It is argued that a better understanding of the patterns of investment and the rationale
behind them will aid planners in their dealings with developers on a day-to-day basis.
The paper is grounded in the literature on financialization—the increased importance of the financial sector and
financial instruments in the economy—and the ways it has been remaking real estate development and
investment (Ashton, 2009), particularly through a set of investment vehicles including Real Estate Investment
Trusts, sovereign equity, and hedge funds, which have made it easier for non-experts to invest in real estate
(Downs, 2010). Other than Downs’ work, most of the literature on this topic has been tied to the residential
rather than the commercial (non-single family development) sector of the real estate industry. This paper takes
up the question of how these financial options are reshaping commercial development, examining their role in
the Boston area’s recent rapid growth, as well as in San Diego, where, by contrast, growth measured by both
sales and price increases has been slower.
The findings are drawn from transaction records in both city and interviews with market participants there.
They point to a changing set of investment agents (both people and tools) at work in real estate markets. Insights
from investors and the trade literature help explicate how the nexus of financial instruments, investors, and
institutions, as well as developers is producing both the rapid increase in pricing and the investment patterns in
the data.
For planners it is crucial to know the mechanisms that drive real estate development in different contexts, and to
learn to ask questions to determine if a project is likely a speculative investment. The risk associated with the
choice of investor can be as important as the choice of soil on which to build. The investors should be considered,
for instance, when the possibility of economic development subsidies comes into play. Moreover, it has long
been too easy for city officials to look to construction as a principle engine of economic growth. A clearer
understanding of how real estate developers and investors work should help planners be somewhat more
sanguine when approached with new projects for their community.
References
 Ashton, Philip. 2009. “An Appetite for Yield: The Anatomy of the Subprime Mortgage Crisis.”
Environment and Planning A 41 (6): 1420–41.
 Ball, Michael. 2006. Markets & Institutions in Real Estate & Construction. Oxford; Malden, MA: Blackwell
Pub.
 Downs, Anthony. 2007. Niagara of Capital : How Global Capital Has Transformed Housing and Real Estate
Markets. Washington, D.C.: Urban Land Institute.
 Henneberry, John, and Steven Rowley. 2002. “Developers’ Decisions and Property Market Behaviour.” In
Development and Developers : Perspectives on Property, edited by Simon Guy and John Henneberry,
96–114. Oxford; Malden, MA: Blackwell Science.
 Pryke, Michael. 1994. “Looking Back on the Space of a Boom: (re)developing Spatial Matrices in the City
of London.” Environment and Planning A 26 (2): 235–264.

Abstract Index #: 40
WINNING THE GAMES: BEST PRACTICES FOR SECURING COMMUNITY BENEFITS FROM MAJOR SPORTING
EVENTS
Abstract System ID#: 598
Individual Paper

THOM, Michael [University of Southern California] mdthom@usc.edu, presenting author, primary author
VAUGHN, Tay [University of Southern California] tvaughn@usc.edu
A growing body of academic literature indicates that major sporting events fail to yield social and economic gains
for host city. Worse, anecdotal accounts suggest the events may do more harm than good. As a result,
potential hosts have increasingly refrained from submitting bids. Yet post-event experiences are not universally
negative; Los Angeles, Atlanta and other Olympic city worldwide have leveraged new facilities and image
enhancement to create sustained benefits.
Achieving success involves a blend of active stakeholder involvement, smart public policy and thoughtful urban
design. With due care to these issues, host city can minimize gentrification, finance economically and
environmentally sustainable facilities, and reap the benefits of global media exposure.
But how? This study assumes an evidence-based lens to report on the experience of seven recent or future
Olympic city: Los Angeles, Atlanta, Rio de Janeiro, London, Athens, Beijing and Sydney. Our analysis is based on
stakeholder interviews, qualitative and quantitative assessments of financing arrangements, observation of
stadia design elements, and data on post-game facilities utilization. Our findings represent a series of “best
practices” that, if followed, benefit the host and event organizers alike.
Abstract Index #: 41
JOB LOSS PATTERNS, SUBSEQUENT JOB QUALITY AND INCOME CHANGES AT INDIVIDUAL LEVEL IN A
TRANSITIONAL MANUFACTURING-PORT CITY, INCHEON, SOUTH KOREA
Abstract System ID#: 604
Individual Paper
JUNG, Namji [Seoul National University] namji.jung@gmail.com
Job loss carries enduring effects on career development, income growth and other socio-economic opportunities
for individuals and families, which, in turn, are intertwined with local economic growth. For instance, those who
experience involuntary job loss due to an employer's decisions suffer particularly long unemployment period and,
when re-employed, are more likely to fill part-time positions. As results, their earnings will be substantially lower
than in their prior jobs (Faber, 2011). As such involuntary job loss reproduces income inequality in city and
regions and such effects are thought to be more pronounced in declining industry sectors. Thus understanding
patterns and subsequent consequences of job loss is important to enhance our knowledge on how local labor
market dynamics shape socio-economic aspects of local residents' lives. It is also important to acknowledge that
these mechanisms might occupationally and spatially manifest differently even within a same locality because
labor market dynamics are, while governed by a nation-wide employment relations regulations, influenced by
specific local industrial structures, growth patterns, and hiring and management practices unique to a specific
industry sector.
This study pays a particular attention to job loss patterns and the post-job loss changes in Inchoen, South Korea.
Incheon is actively transforming itself from a traditional industrial-port city to a post-industrial global city building
on its proximity to China’s east shore and its newly developed ‘Free Economic Zone’ also known as Songdo. The
city’s transitional status is apparent in the shrinking size and profit rates of manufacturing firms and spatial
polarization between newly developed middle class area and the old inner city. This study hypothesizes that
these industrial and spatial changes are reflected in local labor market dynamics, resulting in higher and
involuntary job loss rates in the manufacturing related occupations than in other cases. Income change after job
loss is also expected to be greater than for other occupations. This pattern will also be spatially pronounced
where manufacturing is concentrated.
To test these hypotheses, a panel analysis on five years of data (2008~2012) from the Regional Displaced Worker
Survey, conducted by Bureau of Statistic in South Korea every year will be performed. Important variables such as
job loss rates, unemployment period, and post-job loss changes in job quality and earnings will be analyzed

against workers’ individual characteristics, such as age, race, marital status, gender, educational attainment and
industry sector. Job quality is measured by changes in employment arrangements (fulltime and part-time) and
inter-industry mobility (between high-end and low-end sectors). Earnings change is measured by the real
earnings change between the previous and subsequent jobs.
Understanding these mechanisms provides insights to identify what kind of policy intervention can help creating
more secure and well paying jobs, thus consequentially subdues the constantly growing income inequality in the
city. The study contributes to the economic development and regional planning fields by highlighting the labor
market dynamics that shape workers’ career development opportunities as well as affect job quality and income
inequality.
References
 Chapple, K. and Lester, B. (2007) Emerging patterns of regional resilience. Berkeley Institute of Urban
and Regional Development. http://escholarship.org/uc/item/9b7979mq
 Farber, H. (2011). Job Loss in the Great Recession: Historical Perspective from the Displaced Workers
Survey, 1984-2010. NBER working paper. http://www.nber.org/papers/w17040.
 Kalleberg, A. L. (2014) Growing Job Insecurity and Inequality between Good Jobs and Bad Jobs: An
Interview with Arne Kalleberg. Journal of Economic Sociology. 15. 4.
 Kalleberg, A. L. (2011) Good jobs, bad jobs: the rise of polarized and precarious employment system in
the United States, 1970s to 2000s. New York, Russell Sage Foundation.
 White, R. (2009) Displacement-related earnings loss: evaluating trad adjustment assistance and wage
insurance. Labor Studies Journal. 34. 2.

Abstract Index #: 42
ASSESSING THE  impact OF MARCELLUS SHALE GAS EXTRACTION ACTIVITIES IN THE SMALL comminuty OF
SOUTHWEST PENNSYLVANIA
Abstract System ID#: 941
Individual Paper
GHOSH, Sudeshna [Indiana University of Pennsylvania] sudeshna.ghosh@iup.edu
The recent boom in natural gas extraction activities from Marcellus Shale is resulting in rapid socio-economic
transformations in the small comminuty of southwest Pennsylvania (PA). Although the presence of natural gas
in Marcellus Shale had been recorded decades ago, profitable ways of its extraction have only been possible in
the past few years due to innovations in hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling techniques. In southwest PA,
the number of “Unconventional” wells that extract natural gas from unconventional sources such as, Marcellus
Shale increased exponentially from 336 in 2008 to 3,658 in 2014 (PADEP 2014). Despite being in its initial stages
of development Marcellus Shale gas extraction activities in PA generated thousands of jobs and businesses and
billions in tax revenues since 2008, and are anticipated to grow steadily in the next few decades (Considine et. al.
2010).
Communities experiencing rapid economic growth with increase in energy extraction activities, such as natural
gas extraction, are termed as “boomtowns” in the literature. A number of longitudinal studies documented
boomtown phenomenon in the comminuty of Wyoming, Utah, and other states in the 70s and 80s. These
studies revealed the vulnerability of small comminuty largely dependent on extraction activities to economic
fluctuations that come with the boom and bust cycles in energy industries, making boomtowns a challenge for
planners and policy makers. The recent growth of Marcellus Shale gas extraction activities in southwest PA
provides an opportunity to explore and document its preliminary  impact in the small comminuty. While some
of these comminuty are already witnessing rapid growth in new development activities, such as single-family
housing, offices, hotels, and retail spaces, due to the local economic growth, others are anticipating growth in the
future. However, it is also perceived that the environment and health risks associated with Unconventional well
drilling techniques may pose serious challenges for development activities in adjoining area.

The purpose of this research is to investigate the  impact of Marcellus Shale gas extraction on development
activities in the small comminuty of southwest PA from 2008 to 2014. Specifically, this paper will 1) analyze the
spatial pattern of new development activities occurring in the small comminuty of southwest PA, and 2) assess
the  impact of geographic proximity to Unconventional wells on the development activities. The study area for
this research includes Washington and Greene counties in southwest PA. The key questions posed here are: Does
increase in Marcellus Shale gas extraction activities result in new development activities in the small
communities? How does geographic proximity to Unconventional well locations impact the new development
activities? Geospatial datasets on Unconventional well locations and their spud dates are collected from
Pennsylvania Spatial Data Access (PASDA) and Pennsylvania Department of environment Protection (PADEP).
Geospatial datasets on land parcel boundaries,  land_use, building permit and property information for
Washington and Greene counties are acquired from OGI Info and Corelogic. Other relevant socio-economic
information are collected from the US Census Bureau at the census block group level. Geospatial analysis and
 land_use modeling techniques are applied to analyze spatial patterns of new residential, commercial and
industrial development activities, measure geographic proximity of such activities from well locations, and assess
the  impact of extraction activities on new developments in the two counties.
References
 Brasier, K. J., M. R. Filteau, D. K. McLaughlin, J. Jacquet, R. C. Stedman, T. W. Kelsey, and S. J. Goetz.
2011. Residents’ Perceptions of Community and environment  impact from Development of Natural
Gas in the Marcellus Shale: A Comparison of Pennsylvania and New York Cases. Journal of Rural Social
Sciences. Vol. 26 (1): 32-61.
 Considine, T., R. Watson, S. Blumsack. 2010. The Economic  impact of the Pennsylvania Marcellus Shale
Gas Play: An Update. Penn State University Report. Accessed February 10, 2014,
http://marcelluscoalition.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/05/PA-MarcellusUpdated-Economic-Impacts5.24.10.3.pdf.
 Engelder, T. 2009. Marcellus 2008: Report Card on the Breakout Year for Gas Production in the
Appalachian Basin. Fort Worth Basin Oil & Gas Magazine. (August): 19–22. Accessed February 10, 2014,
http://www.geosc.psu.edu/~jte2/references/link155.pdf.
 Markussen, Ann R. 1978. Socioeconomic Impact Models for Boomtown Planning and Policy Evaluation.
Presented at the Western Regional Science Association Meetings, February 25, Sacramento, CA.
 Muehlenbachs, Lucija, Elisheba Spiller, Christopher Timmins. 2012. Shale Gas Development and Property
Values: Differences across Drinking Water Sources, Working Paper 18390. National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper. Accessed February 10, 2014, http://www.nber.org/papers/w18390.

Abstract Index #: 43
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF MANUFACTURING IN A MEGA-CITY AND ITS IMPACT ON THE REGIONAL ECONOMY
Abstract System ID#: 666
Poster
JO, Jae-Uk [University of Seoul] wodnrwh@naver.com, presenting author
WOO, Myungje [University of Seoul] mwoo@uos.ac.kr, primary author
Industrial structure of developed countries has rapidly transformed from a dominant manufacturing sector to
commercial and service sectors during the last several decades in a process of industrial restructuring. In
addition, an international free trade has reinforced a division of labor that promoted manufacturing firms to
move their production facilities to developing countries to minimize production costs and maximize profits.
However, since the Great Recession, manufacturing has been recognized as an important economic base that can
increase employment and secure the national economy. In this line, the federal government adopts a reshoring
policy that supports production functions to move back to the country.
While the policy has been discussed at the national scale and manufacturing is located across the country, the
manufacturing sector may play a significant role in the regional economy of metropolitan area. However, many

local governments still give priorities on service industries, and a large scale of industrial lands have been
converted to housing and commercial uses.
The purposes of this study is to identify leading and emerging urban manufacturing and their locations in a megacity and to measure their  impact on the regional economy. Specifically, the research questions are:
1.
What is the characteristics of urban manufacturing in a mega-city?” and
2.
“Do really urban manufacturing and industrial zones affect the regional economy positively?”
Literature identifies a positive effect at the national scale in terms of GRDP and employment, while
its effect is mixed at the local level. In the case of the Seoul metropolitan region, this paper uses a
spatial econometrics where changes in population, employment, and local tax revenues are used
dependent variables, and the structures of manufacturing by sub-industry sector are used as
independent variables along with other control variables. The models are run for the whole city
boundary with 424 sub-administrative districts (Dongs) and 5 different sub-regions separately.
Through the identification of leading and emerging manufacturing in a mega-city and their  impact
of the regional economy, the results will provide policy implications to decision makers who
consider a new industrial and  land_use policy for economic development.
References
 Donaldson, C.C. and O'Keefe, S. (2013). "The Effects of Manufacturing on Educational Attainment and
Real Income" Economic Development Quarterly, 27(4): 316-324.
 Howland, M. (2011). "Planning for Industry in a Post-Industrial World-Assessing Industrial Land in a
Suburban Economy" Journal of the American Planning Association, 77(1): 39-53.
 Lester, T.W., Kaza, N. and Kirk, S. (2013). "Making Room for Manufacturing-Understanding Industrial
Land Conversion in city" Journal of the American Planning Association, 79(4): 295-31.
 Mckinsey & Company. (2012). "Manufacturing the future: The next era of global growth and
innovation".
 Paull. E. (2008). "The environment and Economic  impact of Brownfields Redevelopment", Northeast
Midwest Institute.

Abstract Index #: 44
LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND THE GEOGRAPHY OF THE ROBOTICS INDUSTRY
Abstract System ID#: 689
Individual Paper
LEIGH, Nancey Green [Georgia Institute of Technology] ngleigh@coa.gatech.edu, presenting author, primary
author
KRAFT, Benjamin [Georgia Institute of Technology] Ben.Kraft@gatech.edu
There has been an increase in popular media stories about robots because recent technological advances make
the prospect of their entrée into work and daily life more an imminent reality than a fantasy. An overlooked
aspect of the rise of the robots is their implications for local and regional economic development. Our paper
begins to address this by describing the geography of the robotics industry and situating it within existing
knowledge, policy, and trends in regional development.
The primary contribution of our work is to develop a comprehensive map of the robotics industry in the United
States. This research is performed “manually” because, with the lack of a North American Industrial Classification
System (NAICS) code specifically designated for robots, there is no way to determine the spatial patterns and
characteristics of the robot industry from existing formal data sources. Our database development combines
membership lists from the North American trade association for robotics with several proprietary online business
databases, including ThomasNET and ReferenceUSA. With our database, we will map and conduct descriptive
spatial analyses of the geographic relationship of robotics firms and clusters to other important co-predictors of
robot-aware regional economic development.

The robotics industry is unique and complex. It lies at the nexus of production, service provision, and innovation.
Robot suppliers produce robots and a wide-ranging array of peripheral and auxiliary components. Within the
services sector, a highly skilled and specialized set of advanced producer services firms called integrators assists
manufacturers in implementing robotic system.
After decades of use in large advanced manufacturing operations, smaller, safer, and cheaper robots are finding
their way into small shops. Robots are also entering other fields such as healthcare, logistics, and domestic
services. Robotics thus has innovative potential on two levels: the first is in relation to the robotics technology
itself, and the second relates to the new products and processes that robot-users will be able to develop.
Straddling the boundary of the service and manufacturing sectors, the geography of robotics is particularly
relevant for planners and economic developers because it has implications for regional growth. Within an
industry cluster framework (Porter, 2011), local expertise in robotics can serve to strengthen linked industries
and become a driver of competitive advantage. Robotics also includes producer service firms, which are
important parts of both global value chains and local economies (Malecki, 1997). Recent scholarship suggests
that contrary to post-industrial narratives, the co-location of production and innovation actually continue to track
strongly with regional growth (Clark, 2013). Along these lines, current research, coinciding with an uptick in
manufacturing employment since the Great Recession, is renewing the idea that manufacturing—albeit in a more
efficient and highly productive form—is a foundational element in regional economies (Leigh & Choi, 2013). At
the same time, the historical record of worker dislocation due to the introduction of new technology is a long
one, and robots pose a new threat.
To understand how the robotics industry fits into local and regional economic development, we must first
understand its geography. In the absence of formally collected data, our mapping project will serve this purpose.
It will also be a starting point for related policy and strategy discussions.
References
 Clark, J. (2013). Working Regions: Reconnecting Innovation and Production in the Knowledge Economy:
Routledge.
 Leigh, N. G., & Choi, T. (2013). Manufacturing Contribution to U.S. Metropolitan Economies in the 21st
Century. Paper presented to the AESOP-ACSP Joint Congress. Dublin.
 Malecki, E. J. (1997). Technology and economic development: the dynamics of local, regional and
national competitiveness (2nd ed. ed.). Longman: Harlow, Essex, England.
 Porter, M. E. (2011). Competitive advantage of nations: creating and sustaining superior performance:
Simon and Schuster.

Abstract Index #: 45
THE IMPORTANCE OF QUALITY OF LIFE IN BREWERY LOCATION DECISIONS
Abstract System ID#: 694
Pre-organized Session: Innovation, E’ship & Economic Development II
NESSE, Katherine [Kansas State University] knesse@k-state.edu, presenting author, primary author
GREEN, Timothy [Clemson University] tgreen8@clemson.edu
Traditional firm location theory (Weber, Moses, Hotelling, etc) explains firm location decisions in terms of factor
prices, transportation costs of inputs and outputs, and strategic moves to gain spatial monopoly over markets. While
these remain centrally important, a number of firms selling directly to consumers have begun to make public
claims about the importance of local culture in location decisions. To some degree, these claims may be simply a
form of “lifestyle” branding, but alternatively they may reflect actual particular locational advantages though
quality of life amenities or cultural resources. The craft brewery industry is one with the potential for many
secondary factors to play a role in location decisions. We analyze the location decisions of regional craft brewery
expansions and relocations to determine the relative importance of factors contributing to the location decision.
We interviewed craft brewery executives, site consultants and public officials in the selected towns about the

factors that contributed to the decisions of the breweries. We focus on the three groups of factors: traditional
location factors (market size and distance, transportation, cost of inputs), competitive milieu (taxation, public
services, education, agglomeration), and quality of life (cultural amenities, housing options, recreation).

Abstract Index #: 46
IMPROVING TIF TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY: TOWARDS A CONSOLIDATED VIEW OF TIF ACTIVITIES
IN MICHIGAN
Abstract System ID#: 717
Individual Paper
KAYANAN, Carla Maria [University of Michigan] kayanan@umich.edu, presenting author, primary author
BIERI, David [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] bieri@umich.edu
Tax Increment Financing (TIF) is one of the most popular funding mechanisms used to finance downtown and
other local economic development projects in the United States. However, California’s recent dissolution of its
over four hundred Regional Development Authorities, many of which relied heavily on tax increment revenue to
issue bonds that financed redevelopment activities, has caused considerable concern about the possibility of
legal challenges across different comminuty of economic development practitioners. The Michigan Legislature
is currently in the process of evaluating a series of state-level legislative proposals that potentially imply
significant changes in the structure and participation of TIFs, possibly limiting the scope of this economic
development option in Michigan. The opportunity costs of such modifications to TIF practice are not easily
quantifiable for public policy makers or local economic development specialists because statewide data that
could help analysts evaluate the extent and effectiveness of these tax capture tools simply does not exist. This
proposal seeks to contribute to the current policy discussion on TIF reform by demonstrating the barriers that
exist for TIF reporting in the state of Michigan. As such, we develop a blueprint for a comprehensive, state-level
database on the scale, scope and structure of TIF activities in Michigan (Michigan Repository for TIFs “MiRTIF”).
Categorizing, classifying and standardizing the reporting on all active TIFs in the state in a consistent manner, the
MiRTIF is intended to provide a consolidated view for making meaningful fiscal comparisons at different levels of
state and local government.
References
 BRIFFAULT , R. (2010): “The Most Popular Tool: Tax Increment Financing and the Political Economy of
Local Government,” University of Chicago Law Review , 77(1), 65–95.
 WEBER, R., S. D. BHATTA, AND D. F. MERRIMAN (2003): “Does Tax Increment Financing Raise Urban
Industrial Property Values?,” Urban Studies, 40(10), 2001–2021.
 WEBER, R. (2010): “Selling City Futures: The Financialization of Urban Redevelopment Policy,” Economic
Geography, 86(3), 251–274.
 REESE, L. A. (2014): “The Alchemy of Local Economic Development,” Economic Development Quarterly,
28(3), 206–219.
 DYE, R. F., AND D. F. MERRIMAN (2000): “The Effects of Tax Increment Financing on Economic
Development,” Journal of Urban Economics, 47(2), 306–328.

Abstract Index #: 47
REACTIVE RECRUITING: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PLANNING AND THE GROWTH OF REQUESTS FOR
INFORMATION (RFIS)
Abstract System ID#: 719
Individual Paper
GREEN, Timothy [Clemson University] tgreen8@clemson.edu
Economic development practitioners at local and regional scales devote a great deal of effort toward attracting
capital investment from outside the area (ICMA 2014; Rubin 1988). Much of the scholarship of practice has

characterized this activity as proactive, comprised of outreach to individual firms, attendance at trade shows, and
the crafting of marketing materials (Levy 1996). Anecdotal evidence suggests that in many cases, recruitment is a
reactive process (LeRoy 2005). Cold calls to firms yield little benefit, and high profile visits by political leaders,
such as those of Texas governor Rick Perry to California, are designed to attract voters as much as firms. On the
other hand, requests for information (RFIs) from site selection consultants entice economic development
practitioners with the possibility of real interest from an outside firm. Thus far there has been little research on
this latter reactive aspect of business attraction, though it likely demands as much or more effort from economic
development organizations as more proactive approaches.
This paper addresses the impact that the need to respond to RFIs has on local and regional economic
development practice and explores several related hypotheses. As a means of producing information about a
locality or region, responding to RFIs may constitute a useful planning activity as described by Hopkins (2001).
One possible result of this is that the data produced through the growth in RFIs has actually resulted in more
informed economic development practitioners. On the other hand, the reactive nature of responses to RFIs and
the time it takes to prepare them might undermine practitioners’ knowledge of their region in two ways. First, it
might limit the nature of the information produced as compared to more general planning methods such as
economic base studies or target industry studies. Second, the effort required to produce RFI responses might sap
resources that could have been spent on more strategic analytical efforts.
This research uses data gathered from interviews with economic development practitioners at local and regional
scales in the US to explore the above hypotheses. In doing so, it contributes to the literature on planning and
economic development in several ways. One, it takes a growing but understudied aspect of economic
development practice – responding to RFIs – and makes it the subject of direct research. Two, it draws on
theories of planning to inform economic development practice, building on earlier work in a similar vein by the
author and expanding the scope of planning scholarship.
References
 Hopkins, Lewis D. 2001. Urban Development - the Logic of Making Plans. Washington, DC: Island Press.
 ICMA. 2014. ICMA Economic Development Survey Results 2014.
 LeRoy, Greg. 2005. The Great American Jobs Scam: Corporate Tax Dodging and the Myth of Job Creation.
San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler Publishers.
 Levy, John M. 1996. “What Local Economic Development Developers Actually Do: Location Quotients
versus Press Releases.” In Readings in Planning Theory. Malden , MA: Blackwell.
 Rubin, Herbert J. 1988. “Shoot Anything That Flies; Claim Anything That Falls: Conversations with
Economic Development Practitioners.” Economic Development Quarterly 2 (3): 236–51.

Abstract Index #: 48
REGIMES AT THE FRINGE: COMMODIFICATION IN VIRGINIA WINE COUNTRY
Abstract System ID#: 932
Individual Paper
COWELL, Margaret [Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State University] mmcowell@vt.edu, presenting author,
primary author
SMART, Henry [Virginia Tech] hsmart3@vt.edu
ECKERD, Adam [Virginia Tech] aeckerd@vt.edu
Intergovernmental research on economic development has tended to focus on the relationship between federal
and state level actors, rarely exploring the relationship between state and local governments (Agranoff and
Maguire 1998). This scholarly neglect is likely due to the prevalence of Dillon’s Rule, a 19th Century legal
statement dictating that local/municipal governments exist at the will of the state government, which can
eliminate or grant powers to local governments as it sees fit. It has thus largely been assumed that states manage
localities unidrectionally when operating under Dillon’s Rule, enabling local governments to exert control only so
long as it is consistent with state economic development policy. However, some have noted that the relationship

is not simply one-directional—the relationship is sometimes cooperative, with local governments and state
representatives working closely to negotiate local governance and ensure that state and local economic
development interests align. The relationship can also be conflictual, with local governments exerting power over
state level policy decisions or states thoroughly dominating local authorities. In short, local autonomy is
contextual, by the nature of the policy area, the type of jurisdiction, and the influence of the jurisdiction in the
state (Burns and Thomas 2004).
In this research, we seek to discern trends within these contextual relationships through the application of urban
regime theory to state and local government relations regarding economic development. We suggest that
jurisdictions in close proximity to dense, tax-rich population and business centers are likely to have substantial
power over local economic development relative to state governments than jurisdictions that are more sparsely
populated. Conversely, very sparsely populated area are likely to have local control only when local economic
development policy conform to state priorities. If there is a divergence between state and local goals, then
states are likely to exert nearly unlimited control over local decisions in very rural area. Our main focus is on
economic development at the urban-rural fringe; jurisdictions that are largely rural but are close to the urban
region and are accessible to metropolitan residents. We see these regions as potential area of conflict between
state and local interests where states are neither paternalistic nor partners in economic development.
Drawing on four Virginia counties with varying levels of state interest and control, we suggest that the nature of
the local governing regime will affect the extent to which the state-local relationship is characterized by
cooperation or by conflict. We assess this relationship via an exploratory study of the development of Virginia’s
wine industry at the urban-rural fringe. Through interviews with state and local representatives, local residents,
and wine industry interests, we identify the economic development regimes and power structures at the local
level, describe the nature of the state and local relationship, and consider the lesser-known implications of state
support for wine industry growth as rural area shift from agricultural production economies to rural tourism
consumption economies (Centonze 2010).
References
 Agranoff, R. & McGuire, M. 1998. The Intergovernmental Context of Local Economic Development. State
& Local Government Review 30(3) 150-164.
 Burns, P.F. & Thomas, M. 2004. Governors and the Development Regime in New Orleans. Urban Affairs
Review 39(6) 791-812.
 Centonze, A.L. 2010. Transitional Cluster Development: A Case Study From the New York Wine Industry.
Economic Development Quarterly 24(3) 251– 260.

Abstract Index #: 49
MOVEMENT IN THE TRIANGLE: HOW ENTREPRENEURIAL PATHWAYS INFLUENCE FIRM LOCATION DECISIONS
Abstract System ID#: 779
Pre-organized Session: Innovation, E’ship & Economic Development II
DONEGAN, Mary [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] mdonegan@live.unc.edu
Planners recognize entrepreneurship—in particular, entrepreneurship in innovative industries—as a cornerstone
of long-term economic development. While we have an increasingly robust understanding of the forces that
shape and sustain successful entrepreneurial regions, our understanding does not extend to the forces that
shape small-scale, concentrated geographies of entrepreneurial firms within these regions. This is particularly
problematic for regions with significant economic-geographic heterogeneity, where attempts to buttress a
region's economy via entrepreneurship have the potential to exacerbate long-standing inequitable development
patterns.
Unfortunately, shortcomings in theory and data have hampered our ability to better understand intra-regional
patterns of entrepreneurial geography. Firm location theories remain theoretically and methodologically
separate from regional entrepreneurial development theories; meaningful empirical inquiry into small-scale

geographic patterns requires data that has long eluded us (Arauzo-Carod, Liviano-Solis & Majón-Antolín 2010;
Feldman 2001; Figueiredo, Guimarães & Woodward 2004). Attempts to analyze small-scale entrepreneurial firm
location patterns must address not only the factors that have shaped pre-existing, intra-regional economic
heterogeneity, but also the unique characteristics that drive the decision-making process of subsequent founding
entrepreneurs. To do so requires not just in-depth regional data, but also detailed firm- and entrepreneur-level
data.
This research takes critical steps towards closing the theoretical gap between firm location and entrepreneurial
literatures through two inter-related questions. First, how do entrepreneurial pathways—that is, the
employment and educational histories of entrepreneurial firm founders, particularly those related to anchor
firms and major universities—influence small-scale, intra-regional entrepreneurial firm location decisions? And
second, how do these pathways cumulatively shape a region's small-scale entrepreneurial geographies?
To answer these questions the research utilizes a mixed-methods approach, one that relies on both spatial and
visual analyses of firm location point data and semi-structured entrepreneurial interviews. To limit  impact of
both industrial and regional effects, the research focuses solely on biomedical firms founded in North Carolina's
Triangle region between 1991 and 2010. Data are drawn from two distinct sources: a proprietary database of
entrepreneurial and anchor firms in the region (which in turn relies on dozens of sources; see Feldman & Lowe
2014), and matched records of these firms drawn from the National Establishment Time Series database.
Interviews are conducted with entrepreneurs who founded firms in the proprietary database.
Combined, the data provide detailed information on both firm and entrepreneurial histories, as well as
information on the larger biomedical landscape in the region. The mixed-method approach allows the research to
first identify the extent to which competing entrepreneurial ties to local anchor firms and universities influence
their location decisions, and then explore the process through which these ties influence location decisions. The
study's twenty-year time period allows the research to explore the extent to which small-scale locational patterns
have changed over time—and the reasons behind these shifts.
The research makes several contributions to the literature and practice. First, the research represents a key step
towards filling the theoretical gap that exists between the traditional firm location and regional entrepreneurship
literatures. Second, the research advances our understanding of the forces that shape and cumulatively sustain
or break small-scale geographies of entrepreneurial concentration within a region. Third, to the extent that
practitioners address inequitable economic geographies when crafting economic development strategies, the
research illuminates how promoting entrepreneurship may either reinforce or mitigate pre-existing development
patterns.
References
 Arauzo-Carod, Josep-Maria, Daniel Liviano-Solis, and Miguel Majón-Antolín. 2010. “Empirical Studies in
Industrial Location: An Assessment of Their Methods and Results.” Journal of Regional Science 50 (3):
685–711.
 Feldman, Maryann. 2001. “The Entrepreneurial Event Revisited: Firm Formation in a Regional Context.”
Industrial and Corporate Change 10 (4): 861–891.
 Feldman, Maryann, and Nichola Lowe. Forthcoming. “Triangulating Regional Economies: The Promise of
Digital Data." Research Policy.
 Figueiredo, Octávio, Paulo Guimarães, and Douglas Woodward. 2002. “Home-Field Advantage: Location
Decisions of Portuguese Entrepreneurs.” Journal of Urban Economics 53: 341–361.

Abstract Index #: 50
SUCCESS AND FAILURE IN THE NEW ECONOMY: LESSONS FROM LOS ANGELES AND SAN FRANCISCO
Abstract System ID#: 794
Individual Paper
OSMAN, Taner [University of California, Los Angeles] tanerosman@ucla.edu

Since 1970, the economies of metropolitan Los Angeles and the San Francisco Bay Area have experienced
divergent fortunes, with the Los Angeles region vastly underperforming its northern neighbor. In 1970, per capita
income in Los Angeles was around 91% of that of the Bay Area. At that time, the two regions ranked 1st and 4th
in terms of per capita income amongst all regions throughout the United States. In 2010, by contrast, per capita
income in Los Angeles had fallen to 66% of the Bay Area’s level and the regions ranked 2nd and 56th,
respectively, in the nation. A proximate cause of this divergence lies in changes in the activities that each
economy performs, namely, the industries in which they specialize. However, why is it that the Bay Area is now
the world’s leading metropolitan region in the New Economy, while Los Angeles, which in 1970 contained
industries as technologically advanced as those found anywhere in the world, has failed to gain traction in today’s
leading industries?
At first glance, it is easy to conclude that Los Angeles has fallen on relatively hard times because of the loss of
much of its aerospace sector after the end of the Cold War, while the region has been a major recipient of lowskilled immigrants from Latin America. By contrast, it is clear that San Francisco has “won” the information age
lottery, becoming the world center of that technological revolution and attracting highly skilled immigrants.
However, this in-depth case study reveals major differences between the two regions in social and economic
networks, the practices of their firms, and the overall ecology of organizations in their economies, which has
enabled the two regions to respond differently to the opportunities presented by the New Economy.
Economic development as an academic field contains diverse theoretical elements that explain the divergent
performance of regional economies. We draw on four theoretical streams: international and comparative
development theory, urban economics, economic geography, and the study of institutions to understand
economic change in the two regions. Drawing on detailed quantitative and qualitative research, this study
concludes that standard theoretical tools – notably those provided by urban economics and development theory
– fall short in explaining the regions’ evolving specializations, and this work points to institutional differences that
have enabled changes in specialization and thus development across the two economies.
The divergent economic trajectories of the San Francisco and Los Angeles metropolitan regions have important
implications for individuals, families, comminuty, firms, and governments, just as they would if we were
studying the contrasting fortunes of two independent countries. Had Greater Los Angeles maintained its position
as the fourth wealthiest metropolitan area in the United States, its economic output and per capita income
would be almost a third higher today. This study sheds light on those forces that shape the performance of
regional economies.
References
 MLA
 Storper, Michael. Keys to the city: how economics, institutions, social interaction, and politics shape
development. Princeton University Press, 2013.
 Moretti, Enrico. The new geography of jobs. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2012.
 Saxenian, AnnaLee. Regional advantage. Harvard University Press, 1996.

Abstract Index #: 51
A NEW POLITICS OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT? IDEOLOGY, PARTISAN COMPETITION, AND GOVERNANCE IN
THE REALIGNING SOUTH
Abstract System ID#: 853
Individual Paper
FREYER, Allan [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] freyer.allan@gmail.com
Despite long-standing criticism of the practice as inequitable and ineffective, state and local governments often
use business incentives to induce capital investment and firm location decisions as they compete against one
another in a spatial market for jobs (Markusen, 2007). Scholars have traditionally told two straightforward stories

of how politics influences incentive granting. In the first—the ribbon-cutting story—elected officials pursue
economic growth and job creation as a normative good in order to win re-election, and securing ribbon-cutting
ceremonies with newly located or expanding businesses is one of the most publicly visible means of showing job
creation to the electorate. In turn, elected officials exert pressure on practitioners to “win” a firm location
decision at any cost. This leads to higher rent extraction than would otherwise be the case (Markusen, 2007;
Rubin, 1988), especially during times of economic distress. The second story involves regulatory capture. Business
interests hold elected officials in thrall through campaign contributions and cultural and fiscal ties that privilege
business in the setting of economic development policy. As the business lobby’s influence over the policy process
increases, elected officials are pressured into increasing the public rents available for business to extract
(Molotch, 1993). Both stories assume a political economy of incentive granting that reinforces business privilege
and economic inequality.
Yet these traditional stories about the role of politics in incentive-granting ignore the extent to which a
community’s institutional context shapes the bargaining process over firm location decisions and incentive offers.
While the traditional focus on economic growth remains normative among policy makers at the state and local
levels, the policy question of how to best promote growth has become increasingly contested as partisan
realignment and ideological competition have brought into question previously sacrosanct economic
development tools like business incentives. In turn, this more complex political map is mediated by a governance
regime that yields economic development policy outcomes often quite at odds with what the traditional stories
would predict. These governance institutions—including the growing use of accountability standards and fiscal
controls (Warner& Zheng, 2014)—set the rules by which incentive decisions are made and, by extension, the
ways in which political pressures are brought to bear on these decisions.
This project attempts to address these shortcomings by exploring the following questions:
1.
2.

What political factors influence incentive policy decisions, and how do they do so?
What role do incentive governance institutions play in shaping the relationship between a more
complex political environment and incentive-granting decisions?

The project answers these questions through a critical case analysis of the incentive policy decisions made across
eight legislative sessions of the NC General Assembly, 2007-2014. The study period includes four sessions on
either side of the Great Recession and the realigning 2010 elections, allowing me to study incentive policy
decisions in the context of economic distress and partisan control of government as they change over time. In a
critical case approach, the project then tests the empirical reality of these policy decisions (and why they were
made) against what the traditional stories about politics and economic development would predict under these
changing conditions. North Carolina is the only southern state to have experienced divided government, high
unemployment, and strong incentive governance all at the same time, making it an ideal case for testing the
traditional story.
For data collection and analysis, the project codes interviews, media clips, and legislative debate records related
to common categories of incentive policy decisions made across all eight legislative sessions. This provides a
unique dataset for understanding the complex political and governance-related factors driving incentive policy
decisions—the primary contribution of this project.
References
 Markusen, Ann. (ed). (2007). Reining in the Competition for Capital. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn
Institute for Employment Research.
 Molotch, Harvey. (1993). The Political Economy of Growth Machines. Journal of Urban Affairs15: 29-53,
1993.
 Rubin, H. (1988). Shoot Anything that Flies; Claim Anything that Falls: Conversations with Economic
Development Practitioners. Economic Development Quarterly. 1988 2: 236
 Warner, M. and Zheng, L. (2014) Business Incentive Adoption in the Recession. Economic Development
Quarterly, 2014.

Abstract Index #: 52
JOB LOSS AVOIDANCE AND EXOGENOUS SHOCKS: AN ANALYSIS OF BRAC ACTIONS
Abstract System ID#: 948
Individual Paper
NOLAN, Lauren [University of Illinois at Chicago] laurenn@uic.edu, presenting author, primary author
HABANS, Robert [University of Illinois - Chicago] rhaban2@uic.edu
In September of 2005, the Defense Base Closure and Realignment (BRAC) Commission released its final
recommendations for military installation realignments under the 2005 BRAC round—the formal process by
which the federal government identifies military installations for closure and realignment. The latest BRAC round
impacted roughly 200 installations across the United States and abroad as bases were shuttered and personnel
were relocated to other installations. Like any major economic event, BRAC has significant  impact on the
communities surrounding these installations, particularly for regions with a heavy reliance on the installation for
its employment base. While the Department of Defense (DoD) may benefit from eliminating excess
infrastructure, the impact on the surrounding community can be detrimental. Some regions were able to recover
more quickly than others in the wake of this economic event. This paper seeks to understand why certain
communities were more resilient than others. Specifically, we examine what local conditions existed in
communities whose employment figures rebounded, and what conditions existed in those that did not report job
recovery in order to understand what factors contribute to job loss avoidance.
We employ qualitative comparative Analysis (QCA) to examine characteristics of the local economy in
conjunction with other conditions sufficient for the avoidance of job loss at the local level. In addition to its
usefulness for small and intermediate sample sizes, QCA has advantages for examining diversity among
configurations of causes that may lead to a similar outcome— in this case, the avoidance of widespread job loss
in BRAC-impacted comminuty.
There is a sizable body of work examining the characteristics and  impact of defense reductions. However, much
of this centers on defense industry cuts rather than installation closures. This paper seeks to fill this gap in the
literature by examining the impact of personnel drawdown associated with physical base closures (which in many
cases result in large tracts of land that must now be repurposed). It is likely that the federal government will
issue another BRAC round in the future. Therefore, understanding what local conditions help and hinder
resilience in the wake of personnel drawdown is useful to local planning officials as well as the DoD’s Office of
Economic Adjustments (OEA)—the body charged with assisting defense-impacted comminuty. More broadly,
this paper contributes to the literature on economic recovery and resiliency, and its findings would be applicable
to comminuty undergoing any exogenous economic shock as they seek to mitigate its negative  impact.
References
 Atkinson, Robert. “Defense Spending Cuts and Regional Economic Impact: An Overview.” Economic
Geography, Vol. 69, No. 2, Defense Spending and Regional Development. Apr. 1993, pp. 107-122.
 Hooker, Mark and Michael Knetter. “Measuring the Economic Effects of Military Base Closure.”
Economic Inquiry. Vol. 39, Issue 4, pp. 583-598.
 Poppert, Patrick and Henry Herzog. “Force Reductions, Base Closure, and the Indirect Effects of Military
Installations on Local Employment Growth.” Journal of Regional Science. Vol. 43, No. 3, 2003, pp. 459481.

Abstract Index #: 53
REGIONAL SOFTWARE PRODUCTION: FIRMS, LABOR-MARKETS AND PLACE
Abstract System ID#: 1007
Pre-organized Session: Innovation, E’ship & Economic Development II
MAHMOUDI, Dillon [Portland State University] dillonm@pdx.edu

This paper seeks to understand the extent that regions with software agglomerations exhibit regionally specific
configurations of firm strategies, labor-market structuring and space and place characteristics. First, this paper
will compare these configurations, as regionally specific modes of production, to the ideal types of industrial
districts identified by Markusen (1996). Using both the most recent data combined with change since the dotcom
era (roughly 2002), this analysis will contribute to understandings of the industrial restructuring of the
information technology industries, the software industry and the spatial dynamics of software innovation.
Second, this paper will measure the extent that different regional modes of production yield different industry
and regional economic development outcomes by measuring both regional-level and industry-level economic
development outcomes and their degree of relationship to regionally specific modes of production. In summary,
this paper will identify regional modes of production, map them onto ideal-type theorizations of industry
typologies and regional production typologies (industrial districts), and asserts that divergent modes of
production yield divergent regional and industry outcomes.
References
 Brenner, Neil. 2003. “Stereotypes, Archetypes, and Prototypes: Three Uses of Superlatives in
Contemporary Urban Studies.” City & Community 2 (3): 205–16. doi:10.1111/1540-6040.00051.
 Markusen, Ann. 1996. “Sticky Places in Slippery Space: A Typology of Industrial Districts.” Economic
Geography 72 (3): 293–313.
 Markusen, Ann, Sean DiGiovanna, and Yong Sook Lee. 1999. Second-Tier city: Rapid Growth Beyond
the Metropolis. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
 Piore, Michael, and Charles Sabel. 1986. The Second Industrial Divide: Possibilities For Prosperity. Basic
Books.
 Storper, Michael. 1997. The Regional World: Territorial Development in a Global Economy. The Guilford
Press.

Abstract Index #: 54
ANCHOR UNIVERSITIES IN REGIONAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP ECOSYSTEMS: A CASE STUDY OF TWO COLLEGE
TOWNS
Abstract System ID#: 1053
Pre-organized Session: Innovation, E’ship & Economic Development II
QIAN, Haifeng [University of Iowa] haifeng-qian@uiowa.edu, presenting author, primary author
YAO, Xin [University of Colorado Boulder] Xin.Yao@colorado.edu
There has been a growing scholarly interest in the role universities in regional entrepreneurial activity for the past
two decades (for a review, see Rothaermel et al. [2007]). At the core of this line of literature are the
commercialization of university research and its association of with various types of entrepreneurial activity. A
careful examination of the literature identifies at least three research gaps in existing studies: (1) While a regional
economy can prosper with an anchor-based economic envelopment strategy (Markusen, 1997), evidence on the
role of universities in facilitating regional entrepreneurial activity has been unclear. (2) The university is the major
asset of American college towns, but research on the relationship between universities and entrepreneurship in
the context of regional economic development of American college towns is strikingly rare in the literature. (3) A
holistic approach to the study of university entrepreneurship is needed.
To address these gaps, this research aims at a systematic investigation of the university-entrepreneurship
relationship in regional entrepreneurship ecosystems of American college towns. In particular, we will conduct indepth comparative case studies on two representative college towns: Boulder, CO and Iowa City, IA. Boulder,
home to Colorado’s flagship university, is perhaps the most entrepreneurial college town in the U.S. Iowa City,
home to Iowa’s flagship university, on the other hand is a typical Midwest college town with low entrepreneurial
activity. The purposes of the comparison are to examine (1) the differences in regional entrepreneurship
ecosystems between these two college towns and (2) whether the divergence of regional entrepreneurial
performance at least in part results from the different role of the two anchor universities (i.e., the University of
Colorado and the University of Iowa).

For each case, we will interview both university administrators that are relevant to the decision making of
university entrepreneurship/economic development strategies, and local entrepreneurship support organizations
as well as economic development policymakers/practitioners who work on facilitating entrepreneurship in the
local economy. The purpose of the interviews is to obtain information on:
 Major players and efforts in the regional entrepreneurship ecosystem;
 Details of university strategies and program for entrepreneurial development;
 Self evaluation of the effectiveness of university entrepreneurial efforts;
 Barriers to university entrepreneurial development;
 The university’s interactions with local entrepreneurship support organizations, economic development
policymakers and practitioners in fostering entrepreneurial activity;
 Local entrepreneurship support organizations, economic development policymakers and practitioners’
views on the role of universities in local and regional entrepreneurship development strategies.
Ultimately, entrepreneurs lie at the core of entrepreneurship. Therefore, we will conduct in-depth interviews on
local entrepreneurs both in Boulder, CO and Iowa City, IA. The purpose of these interviews is to obtain the
information on:







Major players and efforts in the regional entrepreneurship ecosystem from the perspectives of
entrepreneurs;
Entrepreneurs/startups’ associations with the university;
Entrepreneurs’ evaluation of university entrepreneurship efforts;
How their businesses have benefitted from or been impeded by the university;
Relative importance of different types of university services to entrepreneurs;
Potential new roles of universities in entrepreneurship.

In each town, we will interview at least 20 entrepreneurs. To guarantee that enough information on the role of
universities can be obtained through these interviews, about one third of interviewees will be selected from
clients of university entrepreneurship program. The other two thirds will be identified via entrepreneurship
support/economic development organizations, among others. The selection of interviewee entrepreneurs will
also take into account the industry base of each city.
References
 Markusen, A. (1996). Sticky places in slippery space: a typology of industrial districts. Economic
geography, 72(3), 293-313.
 Rothaermel, F. T., Agung, S. D., & Jiang, L. (2007). University entrepreneurship: a taxonomy of the
literature. Industrial and corporate change, 16(4), 691-791.

Abstract Index #: 55
THE TEXAS MEDICAL CENTER: MONUMENTS AND MYTHS IN THE BIOMEDICAL ECONOMY
Abstract System ID#: 1102
Individual Paper
HABANS, Robert [University of Illinois - Chicago] rhaban2@uic.edu
This paper examines the history of intersections between local economic development actors and the steadily
increasing footprint of the health care industry in urban and regional economies of the United States. Specifically,
I highlight Houston’s Texas Medical Center (TMC) as an archetypal case of the “urban biomedical district.” Such
designated contiguous zones of hospitals, academic medical centers, and other health-related activities exist
simultaneously as 1) a development and land governance strategy; 2) a distinctive urban form; and 3) a model
replicated across dozens of city in recent decades. I argue that, in Houston as in other city, such districts in a
proximate sense reflect organized responses to local crises of urban development and in health care
organizations coping with reform, competition, and fiscal constraint. Ultimately, and in a manner that

characterizes other transactions between economic development policy and health care, the development of
urban biomedical districts has been tailored at different stages to the needs of powerful but contested
organizations driving reproduction of the institutional field of biomedicine (Scott et al. 2000).
The argument unfolds in two steps. First, relying on interviews and an extensive review of the TMC archives, a
detailed historical case study of the birth and growth of TMC, “the largest medical complex in the world” and one
of the first officially designated medical districts, starkly illustrates the emergence and evolution of this distinctive
form of urban development alongside key episodes of growth and lapse in Houston’s economy. Spanning over
two square-miles with over 100,000 employees, TMC now touts itself as the eighth largest business district in the
country. Yet until relatively recently, TMC as a governance entity has arguably only passively embraced its role as
a major economic engine. Historicizing this case deliberately side-steps the prevailing frameworks in economic
development practice and scholarship of the health care economy’s function in city, such as "Eds and Meds"
(Harkavy and Zuckerman 1999) and life sciences sectoral innovation strategies. Instead, I critically frame this
circumscribed engagement as an expression of institutional authority in the biomedical economy filtered through
political economy of urban entrepreneurialism.
Second, the paper pivots to an examination of TMC’s record as a successful development model, which has
attained a limited degree of replication by other localities that have more recently taken an entrepreneurial
approach to designating and cultivating urban biomedical districts. Though TMC has been held up as a model
“innovation district” (Katz and Wagner 2014), its history illustrates the shortcomings of causal narratives that
downplay the role of state intervention and institutional power.
Attention to local economic development planning actors, the construction and diffusion of development
models, and the scientific and technological dimensions of institutional change at scales beyond the local adds
context to ongoing attempts by economic development practitioners to exploit growth in the health care
economy for job creation, economic diversification, and regional innovation strategies. In many ways, these
policies create fertile platforms for efforts by health care organizations to restructure the delivery of care and by
the life sciences industry to redistribute risk in the development of new technologies to state and local
governments. Meanwhile, economic development actors selectively reproduce and reconstruct narratives of
development that abstract the emergence of local development opportunities from a national health care system
in crisis. Framing the uniquely American variant of institutional biomedicine as a historical urban process
illustrates the constrained but increasingly supportive role of economic development practitioners in the large
and growing economy of health care.
References
 Harkavy, I., & Zuckerman, H. 1999. Eds and Meds: city’ Hidden Assets. Washington, DC: Brookings
Institution Center on Urban and Metropolitan Policy.
 Scott, W. Richard, Martin Ruff, Peter J. Mendel, Carol A. Caronna. 2000. Institutional Change and
 Healthcare Organizations: From Professional Dominance to Managed Care. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
 Katz, Bruce and Julie Wagner. 2014. The Rise of Innovation Districts: A New Geography of Innovation in
America. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Center on Urban and Metropolitan Policy.

Abstract Index #: 56
EMPIRICAL STUDY ON LOCATION FACTORS OF URBAN MANUFACTURING IN SEMI-INDUSTRIAL ZONES OF
SEOUL, SOUTH KOREA
Abstract System ID#: 1122
Poster
YUN, Jongjin [University of Seoul] jongjin@uos.ac.kr, presenting author
WOO, Myungje [University of Seoul] mwoo@uos.ac.kr, primary author

The recent global financial crisis suggests that city dependent on single industrial sector, such as services, are no
longer sustainable in terms of economic health, emphasizing the diversity of industrial structure. As witnessed in
rust-belt area, many comminuty specialized in manufacturing only have suffered from the decline due to the
transformation of industrial structure. The diversity of industrial structure may minimize such a negative impact
when one industrial sector experiences a rapid decline. However, the Great Recession also gives us a lesson that
manufacturing can provide an important economic base particularly for those urban area that are critically
dependent on the tertiary industry. Especially urban manufacturing is not only able to create jobs for various
income classes but also has a significant effect on other sectors, such as tourism, services, and high-tech
industries. While the Seoul metropolitan government has prepared a strategic plan, ‘Smart Economic City Seoul’,
to support major urban manufacturing, such as fashion, machinery, jewelry, and publication, the semi-industrial
zones, which share about 4.5% of the administrative area of Seoul, are under threat from the conversion to
residential, commercial, and business  land_uses. Policy makers and planners in Seoul also try to preserve the
semi-industrial zones for future economic and industrial bases rather than converting them to other  land_uses.
However, the question becomes what industries they need to support and how.
In this context, the purpose of this study is to identify competitive urban manufacturing in Seoul’s semi-industrial
zones and analyze their location factors to help planners develop an integrated policy of industrial and spatial
planning that can enhance productivity of urban manufacturing and increase the amenity of physical
environments.
Previous literature uses logistic and descriptive analyses to identify location factors, such as accessibility, socioeconomic characteristics, information technology, but there is no consideration of spatial proximity among
businesses and physical characteristics, such as floor area ratio, size of lot, and so on. This study employs a mixed
method approach that combines space divisions with spatial econometrics. First, semi-industrial zones are
divided into hexagonal cells. Each cell has the characteristics of urban manufacturing and their locations. Second,
the spatial econometrics identifies location factors with is the number of urban manufacturing (establishments
and employees) as a dependent variable.
The results show that the agglomeration of specific manufacturing and the proximity to related industries are
found as primary factors of the location of urban manufacturing, while the factors are slightly different by subindustry sector of urban manufacturing.
References
 Lester, T.W. Kaza, N. and Kirk, S. (2013). "Making Room for Manufacturing-Understanding Industrial
Land Conversion in city" Journal of the American Planning Association, 79(4): 295-31.
 Howland, M. (2011). “Planning for Industry in a Post-Industrial World : Assessing Industrial Land in a
Suburban Economy” Journal of the American Planning Association, 77(1): 39-53.
 Church, R. L. (2002). “Geographical information system and location science” Computers & Operations
Research, 29(6): 541-562.
 Rajkumar, P. (2013). “A study of the factors influencing the location selection decisions of information
technology firms” Asian Academy of Management Journal, 18(1): 1-17.
 Mazzarol, T. and Choo, S. (2003). “A study of the factors influencing the operating location decisions of
small firms” Property Management, 21(2): 190-208.

Abstract Index #: 57
HARD TIMES IN THE BIG EASY: DISASTER RECOVERY IN A TOURISM-DEPENDENT CITY
Abstract System ID#: 1147
Individual Paper
GLADSTONE, David [University of New Orleans] david.gladstone@uno.edu
New Orleans is among the most popular tourist destinations in the United States, attracting millions of domestic
and international tourists each year. The city is especially known for the many events it hosts on an annual or

semiannual basis, from small-scale conventions, corporate meetings, and local food festivals to mega-events such
as the Super Bowl, the New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival, and Mardi Gras, one of the most popular regularlyscheduled leisure events in the United States. Due largely to an aggressive tourism-oriented urban regime and a
lack of viable alternatives, New Orleans has become heavily dependent upon an event-based economy and the
hospitality industry underlying it as an engine of economic growth and job creation. By 2012 more than one-infour jobs in New Orleans were tourism-related, a greater share than any other industry and a considerably
greater share than in 2004, the year before Hurricane Katrina.
At the same time New Orleans has grown increasingly dependent on tourism, New Orleanians have continued to
suffer from a host of social ills. Surveys have shown that many adults in the city lack basic literacy skills, more
than 40 percent of children live in poverty, the city's murder rate consistently ranks among the highest in the
nation, and Orleans Parish (the central city of the New Orleans metropolitan area) is, after Manhattan, the most
unequal urban county or parish in the United States.
In this paper I place the growth of the New Orleans tourism- and event-based economy in the decade since
Hurricane Katrina within a larger context of social and human development. Given that other U.S. city with
vibrant tourism industries do not always display the same range of social problems found in New Orleans, I pay
particular attention to the links between social outcomes in New Orleans and the city's economic base. I
conclude by considering the degree to which the New Orleans case, or particular aspects of it, may generalize to
other city with large tourism- and event-based economies.

Abstract Index #: 58
DENSITY WARS IN SILICON BEACH: THE STRUGGLE TO MIX NEW SPACES FOR TOIL, PLAY AND STAY IN SANTA
MONICA, CA
Abstract System ID#: 1163
Individual Paper
PETERS, Deike [Soka University of America] dpeters@soka.edu
The ocean-side community of Santa Monica, encircled from all sides by the much larger City of Los Angeles, has
long been one of the premier tourist destinations along the California coastline. Yet market analysts contest that
Santa Monica has now gone ‘from beach town to boom town’, with a slew of dense, mixed-use development
projects slated for completion in the near future that many see as a tipping point in the city’s development.
Creative industries (film, fashion, new media and tech companies) along with tourism activity now dominate the
economic landscape. Newcomers and temporary visitors clash with long-term residents in their visions for the
city’s future, and the new, developer-friendly climate in Santa Monica is seen in stark contrast to ‘the People’s
Republic of Santa Monica’s’ earlier tradition of lower-density, slow growth, progressive urban development
policies that were focused on the supply of public benefits. Yet these public benefits – well-maintained parks,
affordable housing, good public transit and parking – were of course precisely the key elements that
distinguished Santa Monica from its larger neighbor Los Angeles and subsequently made the city a more
attractive place to live, work and play in the first place.
In the case of Santa Monica, this somewhat familiar story of a well-governed, progressive, attractive place
becoming victim to its own success contains some interesting twists, and these will be the focus on this chapter.
Following a short literature review linking developments in Santa Monica to larger processes of urban
revitalization and rescaling, the chapter will unpack the complex scales and consequences of protest and
resistance against two key pro-visitor oriented development sites in the city (the redeveloped Civic Center area
and the new Bergamont Transit Village). It will reveal new fault lines among protagonists not just between recent
and long-term residents but also along ethnic and generational lines. Few scholars have highlighted the fact that
there is an important flip-side to the cliché of the elderly, white anti-development resident: younger, non-white
residents are not necessarily neutral on matters of density and development, but are in fact often strongly
supportive of it. Data from Santa Monica’s 600+-page 2014 Development Survey Report reveals that a majority of
Santa Monicans between ages 18 and 24 strongly supports new hotel development, and that over 60 percent of

African Americans and Hispanics were either strongly or somewhat in support of proposals for new hotels in the
city. Responses were also telling in the case of the Bergamot Area Plan, which was supported by 96 percent of
the city’s Hispanics and 75 percent of Asian Americans. The chapter also discusses the consequences of a
broadened, multi-ethnic and multi-generational perspective on future tourism development priorities.

Abstract Index #: 59
WHAT CULTURAL ECONOMY HAS BROUGHT TO PEOPLE: THE EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE OF INDUSTRIAL
HOMOGENIZATION AND RESIDENTIAL HOLLOW IN THE OLD CORE OF SEOUL
Abstract System ID#: 1172
Individual Paper
SHIM, Hanbyul [Seoul National Unversity] vheerk@gmail.com
Cultural economy seems to have two contradictory faces. It is strategically elaborated by planners in favor of it as
a fume-less engine of new economic growth in post-industrial era. On the other side, it is criticised for bringing
deeper inequality to those who are vulnerable to the changes that it brings about. As well as policy chasing
after the duplication of precedent success, there have been reflexive recognition that discussed if it had brought
any real cultural development to society, but, according to which, it is fairly hard for planners and policy makers
not to lose direction but to maneuver for a tamed outcome.
For the basis to discover any lever to control negative ramifications, this study is to investigate what happened to
the rest of economic actors who were unattended majority behind a few glorious spots of cultural economy in
Seoul and how big the scale of the change was. Empirically, it examines the longitudinal change of the industrial
composition of sub-districts within central Seoul for 20 years, from the incipient stage to present, focusing on
how resources and production activities were reorganised and distributed spatially in terms of employment and
enterprise activity during the growth of cultural economy. The analysis will address the initiation, evolvement,
and the industrial effect of cultural economy as the basic trajectory of the change with its phasic features, which
the questions below accompany.




What was the path of change in the industrial composition of central Seoul during the period?
What was the contingent push factor and its direct effect in terms of industry migration or resident
displacement and substitution?
How can we evaluate the effects?

The change of industrial composition is extracted from the annual data of national firm census that surveyed all
the entrepreneurial activity. Since the old core of Seoul is planned and elaborated by municipal policy for a
decade to be an epicenter of cultural economy, the analysis includes exploring those policy and other
contingent factors. The changes of residential neighbourhood in central Seoul is described with the data of real
estate transactions and resident registration.
While this study is on-going, the preliminary findings of this study suggests that cultural economy has serial
phases with respective leading actors of each phase, which would result in consequential industrial migration. It
also homogenized the industry composition when the area exposed to excessive change that was ensued by the
substitution of the resident, which might risk economic resilience and sustainability.
References
 Evans, G. (2002). Cultural planning: an urban renaissance? : Routledge.
 Power, D., & Scott, A. J. (2004). Cultural Industries and the Production of Culture: Taylor & Francis.
 Chang, T. (2014). ‘New uses need old buildings’: Gentrification aesthetics and the arts in Singapore.
Urban Studies.

Abstract Index #: 60
SHRINKING city: PROCESSES PRECEDING POPULATION CHANGE AND THE PLANNING RESPONSE
Abstract System ID#: 1203
Individual Paper
HARTT, Maxwell [University of Waterloo] mhartt@uwaterloo.ca
As urban shrinkage progressively becomes more commonplace, a better understanding of the processes
preceding changes in migration and natural balance is needed. Alternative attitudes, strategies and policy must
be developed to address the associated challenges. While urban shrinkage research is well established in Europe
and is gaining momentum in the American discourse, Canadian academics and practitioners have been reluctant
to explore issues concerning slow growth, no growth and shrinkage. This reluctance has been attributed to the
absence of strategies and best practices in the planning toolbox that would provide guidance for urban area
experiencing shrinkage. This paper contributes to an emerging body of global research by examining the
temporal dimension of the economic-demographic relationship in shrinking city, and bridges transnational
knowledge by assessing the potential for introducing foreign strategies into the Canadian jurisdiction. Specifically,
it asks – in Canada, how applicable and feasible are planning policy and strategies that address the challenges of
shrinking city?
Response strategies to urban shrinkage were identified through an in-depth analysis of the academic and
professional literature in both the North American and European discourse. 225 discussions of strategies were
identified in the literature, summarized and catalogued into five groups: revitalization, consolidation, demolition,
greening and land banking. An evaluation framework, adapted from current policy transferability literature, was
developed and applied to assess the transferability of shrinking city strategies to the Canadian context.
In order to ascertain the current and projected extent of Canadian urban shrinkage, a vulnerability assessment
examining economic, demographic and socioeconomic trends was conducted for every city (with population over
10,000) in Canada. Due to historical and projected population loss, economic transformations, and similar
demographic and geographic profiles, Cape Breton Regional Municipality, Nova Scotia and Chatham-Kent,
Ontario were selected as case studies. Although factors contributing to urban shrinkage are well known, the
evolution of these factors within the process of urban shrinkage process is not. A 19 variable multi-criteria time
series analysis of each city was conducted in order to identify and establish trends in the evolution of the urban
shrinkage process. Cross-correlation calculations were used to determine temporal relationships between
variables, and to establish a timeline of events within the process of urban shrinkage.
The time series analysis confirmed that urban shrinkage is a non-linear, complex process with strong
interrelations and iterative loops. Additionally, the case study comparison demonstrated interregional
differentiation as the two city had unique shrinkage trajectories. The evolution of urban shrinkage processes in
each case study city were considered and, based upon its unique profile, matched with shrinking city strategies
considered potentially transferable to the Canadian context. Given that Canadian urban research is heavily
fixated on large urban area and tends to ignore or discount peripheral depopulation and its associated costs,
there is a pressing need for additional research on declining urban area. This research will assist policy-makers,
planners and comminuty in general in planning for urban shrinkage as the associated challenges have, thus far,
been met with little success by the Canadian planning profession.
References
 Großmann, K., Bontje, M., Haase, A., & Mykhnenko, V. (2013). Shrinking city: Notes for the further
research agenda. city, 35, 221–225.
 Hoekveld, J. J. (2012). Time-Space Relations and the Differences between Shrinking Regions. Built
Environment, 38(2), 179–195.
 all, H. M. (2009). Slow growth and decline in greater Sudbury: challenges, opportunities, and foundations
for a new planning agenda. Canadian Journal of Urban Research, 18(1), 1–26.
 Hollander, J. B., & Németh, J. (2011). The bounds of smart decline: a foundational theory for planning
shrinking city. Housing Policy Debate, 21(3), 349–367.



Schatz, L. K., Leadbeater, D., Martinez-Fernandez, C., & Weyman, T. (2013). From “Up North” to “Down
Under”: Dynamics of Shrinkage in Mining comminuty in Canada and Australia. In K. Pallagst, T.
Wiechmann, & C. Martinez-Fernandez (Eds.), Shrinking city: International Perspectives and Policy
Implications (pp. 205–223). New York: Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 61
UNDERSTANDING URBAN RENEWAL PROCESSES THROUGH SAM-MULTIPLIER ANALYSIS: A CASE STUDY OF
BOGOTAÂ´S DOWNTOWN
Abstract System ID#: 1279
Individual Paper
DE LA OSSA, Melisa [Universidad de los Andes] m.de120@uniandes.edu.co, presenting author
PEREZ BURGOS, Javier [Universidad de los Andes] j.perezburgos@uniandes.edu.co
The District Administration of Bogota, Colombia wants to implement an urban renovation process in the
neighborhood of Fenicia, located in the city’s downtown. This project includes an urban and social transformation
of the area and its main goal is to promote comprehensive development of the zone as well as to fulfill the basic
needs of the community.
Gentrification is a typical phenomenon associated to urban renovation processes. There is ample evidence that
neighborhoods with advantageous location are more likely to experience this phenomenon (London and Palen
1984; Brueckner, Thisse, and Zenou 1999; Helms, 2003). Fenicia’s strategic location makes gentrification very
likely once its renovation takes place. Given the important implications of this phenomenon, like the
displacement of the original population as a consequence of rent increase (Gould and O’regan, 2011), this study
determines the potential economic effects of the Plan in the Fenicia neighborhood and in the city of Bogota.
Evidence on the potential economic effects of Bogota´s downtown renewal projects encountered so far is based
on a static cost-benefit analysis. It is found that the aggregate net change in social welfare has a net present value
of approximately US$120 millions. Property owners are the group of agents that would benefit the most from the
project, since their asset valuation and rent increase would be in the order of 93%. The study also suggests that
owners might experience an increase in living costs as a consequence of gentrification, and that this situation
might induce negative effects on welfare for certain social groups.
In order to have a broader understanding of the social and economic  impact for the city we built a Social
Accounting Matrix-SAM for the year 2012 from which we calculate the direct, indirect, and induced  impact of
the renewal Plan. Through this analysis it is possible to establish the relationship between the neighborhood’s
productive sectors, factors and institutions. Consequently, it is feasible to quantify the effect that the renovation
Plan would have on production, wages, income distribution, employment, among other economic variables.
The multipliers analysis and the preliminary evidence suggests that the Plan will have positive  impact in terms of
employment in certain sectors, commercial activity in the zone, living costs of residents, income distribution,
among others. The project is also expected to generate a gentrification process and one of its main consequences
is the displacement of the poorest population, as a consequence of the increase in living costs. All this
expectation suggests that the project will generate positive changes in welfare for certain groups, like business
owners. Employment in the education, transportation, and lodging services is expected to increase, while sectors
like manufacturing are expected to show decreases in their levels of employment.
This type of studies are an important tool for decision making, particularly in the case of urban renewal projects,
as they reveal the costs and benefits associated with this sort of interventions. Gentrification processes are
complicated phenomenon to understand, using a SAM-based multiplier analysis enables us to get a more detailed
picture of the potential gains and losses associated with this social transformation processes. Policy makers in the
urban_planning arena should introduce these sort of tools in order to make more informative decisions.

References
 Biderman, C., Sandroni, P., & Smolka, M. (2010). "Intervenciones urbanas a gran escala: el caso de Faria
Lima en São Paulo". En L. Mullahy, & M. Smolka, Perspectivas urbanas. Temas cíticos en políticas de
suelo en América Latina (págs. 478-485). Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.
 Collins, W., & Shester, K. (2012). "Slum Clearance and Urban Renewal in the United States" . American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, American Economic Association, vol. 5(1), 239-273.
 Defourny, J., & Thorbecke, E. (1984). "Structural Path Analysis and Multiplier Descomposition within a
Social Accounting Matrix Framework". The Economic Journal 94, 111-136.
 Partridge, M., & Rickman, D. (2010). "Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) Modelling for Regional
Economic Development Analysis". Regional Studies, 1311-1328.

Abstract Index #: 62
THE PROCESS OF BUILDING RESILIENT REGIONAL ECONOMY
Abstract System ID#: 1313
Individual Paper
KWON, Jinwoo [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] jinwoo.kwon@rutgers.edu, presenting author,
primary author
LAHR, Michael [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] lahr@rutgers.edu
Various national and regional socioeconomic shocks such as recessions can affect the stability of regional
economies. Still, regions react in diverse ways to the same forces; some recover slowly despite being less affected
while others recover rapidly despite being heavily impacted. Academics and policy makers have long sought to
discover how some regions are able to mitigate negative  impact while others are less resilient. Indeed, planning
for resilience has become a hot topic in policy-making. Current Employment Statistics (CES) State and Area
Estimates illustrate how individual Metropolitan Statistical area (MSAs) in the United States maintained
economic activity throughout the downturn over the past three decades. The Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue, WA MSA
is the only metro area with a population of 800,000 or more that achieved significant employment growth and
mustered stable employment: Plus when it did suffer downturns, it recovered quickly from them from 1980 to
2014. Despite a similar size, the Philadelphia-Camden-Wilmington, PA-NJ-DE-MD MSA was adversely affected and
surprisingly so. It experienced marginal growth with significant fluctuations and displayed a general inability to
recover quickly from downturns.
This study extends prior research in which we identify and investigate the degree of influence of an array of
demographic and socioeconomic correlates to growth, instability, and resilience in all US MSAs over the past
three decades. Here, we probe more deeply for causal processes that may have been unwittingly masked in the
course of statistical analyses. We do so by exploring two distinct MSAs: Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue, WA and
Philadelphia-Camden-Wilmington, PA-NJ-DE-MD. The exploration starts where the broader analysis left off, with
a deep examination of pertinent local-area socioeconomic, demographic, and government expenditure data to
obtain a better grasp of the socioeconomic dynamics of the two MSAs. This examination reveals historical
changes in resident characteristics, industrial structure, and relationship with neighboring regions, which explains
how the MSA arrived at its current economic position. We also investigate archival documents of the state and
local legislatures pertaining to economic policy to get a sense of the intentions of the local political economies.
Subsequently we perform a set of semi-structured interviews with local professors of the two economies, as well
as with government officials who direct employment-related departments, mangers of personnel divisions and
government liaison groups of major local employers, and representatives of relevant nonprofit organizations that
focus public policy and economic development. The idea behind these interviews is to uncover more detail on (1)
the importance to local economic development of key players including individual and institutions, (2) the
effectiveness and bureaucratic nature of the local policymaking as well as of the processes of implementing
policies, and (3) the perceived extent of inter-institutional collaboration and/or distrust. Our findings
demonstrate importance of the roles of government at large, particular politicians, firms, and other
nongovernmental organizations in policymaking and implementation. In turn, we discover how the roles and

capacities of these different agencies processes are perceived to affect the corresponding MSA’s growth,
stability, and adaptability to ever-changing external forces.
Existing studies on economic growth and stability have centered on a purely quantitative examination of many
geographic entities. Studies on resilience have not emerged until recently; thus, attempts to examine planning
processes for resilient regional economic growth are rare and brief if they exist at all. Therefore, we provide an
in-depth comparative analysis of two cases to suggest specific strategies that a region may adopt in order to lead
its economy to grow steadily, stably, and resiliently. Furthermore, the use of various planning tools in unveiling
the underlying relationships between correlates and effects enables practical suggestions for policymakers and
regional officials.
References
 Connaughton, J., & Madsen, R. (2009). Regional implications of the 2001 recession. Annals of Regional
Science, 43(2), 491-507.
 Hill, E., T. St. Clair, H. Wial, H. Wolman, P. Atkins, P. Blumenthal, S. Ficenec, and A. Friedhoff. (2011).
Economic shocks and regional economic resilience. BRR Working Paper 2011-13. Berkeley, CA: Building
Resilient Regions.
 Landis, J. (2014). The determinants of metro-level economic resilience: An empirical investigation.
Working paper.
 Owyang, M., Rapach, D., & Wall, H. (2009). States and the business cycle. Journal of Urban Economics,
65, 181-194.
 Wilkerson, C. (2009). Recession and recovery across the nation: Lessons from history. Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City Economic Review, 94(2), 103-122.

Track 3: environment Planning and Resource Management
Abstract Index #: 63
USING GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Abstract System ID#: 45
Pre-organized Session: Using Green Infrastructure for Stormwater Management
DANIELS, THOMAS [University of Pennsylvania] thomasld@pobox.upenn.edu
More than 770 US city have combined storm and sanitary sewers. Separating these sewers would be cost
prohibitive; yet, combined sewer overflows are a major cause of water pollution in urban area.
Several city are using green infrastructure to manage stormwater in an attempt to improve water quality,
reduce combined sewer overflow events, and comply with EPA mandates under the Clean Water Act.
This paper provides an overview of Philadelphia's historic Long Term Control Plan Consent Decree with EPA which
features the use of green infrastructure to reduce stormwater runoff and Combined Sewer Overflow events.
EPA is requiring Philadelphia to "green up" 10,000 acres by 2035. Philadelphia expects to green up half of these
acres through subdivision regulations which require new developments and major renovations to retain the first
inch of rain in a 24-hour storm. The other half will mainly depend on getting landowners to green up their
properties.
Philadelphia imposes has a stormwater utility fee on all properties based on impervious surface. The expectation
is that the fee will create an incentive for property owners to green up their properties and hence reduce the
stormwater fee. The city also has a tree planting program, and gives out free trees to property owners.

But other city are using other approaches to stormwater management that Philadelphia may benefit from
employing.
This paper analyzes Philadelphia's stormwater control efforts and compares them to stormwater program in
Washington, DC and Prince George's County, MD.
Note: There are three papers proposed for this session: This one (Rpof. Tom Daniels) Prof. Amy Lynch of Ohio
University; and Theo Lim, Ph.D. candidate in City and Regional Planning at the University of Pennsylvania
References
 Philadelphia Water Department. 2011. Amended Green City, Clean Waters. Philadelphia: Philadelphia
Water Dept.
 Mandarano, L. 2011. Clean Waters, Clean City: Sustainable Storm Water Management in Philadelphia in
M. Slavin, ed. Sustainability in America's city, Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
 Daniels, T. 2014. The environment Planning Handbook, 2nd ed. Chicago: APA Planners Press.

Abstract Index #: 64
COMPASSION BUILDING PRACTICES TO IMPROVE HAZARD MITIGATION AND CLIMATE ADAPTATION PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 54
Individual Paper
LYLES, Ward [University of Kansas] wardlyles@ku.edu
Widespread failure to realize national visions of sustainable and resilient hazard mitigation and climate change
adaptation is due in large part to reactive and narrowly focused local planning and implementation (c.f. Burby
1998, Berke and Lyles 2013). Local decision makers typically promote economic development and private
property rights while marginalizing the reduction of suffering, property damage, and ecological degradation.
Insufficient local commitment to risk reduction, especially for using  land_use approaches to steer development
out of hazardous area, is a critical barrier to long-term risk reduction. External factors like national or state
policy mandates and the opening of post-disaster windows of opportunity can influence local commitment, but
mandates often lead to pro-forma local planning that meets minimum requirements and windows of opportunity
are often ephemeral. Comparatively little knowledge exists of how to proactively build local commitment to risk
reduction in pre-event planning without relying on major external or post-disaster natural, political, or socioeconomic pressures.
Substantial political-economic forces result in the prioritization at the local level of land development for private
gain (Logan and Molotch 2007). Building proactive local commitment to risk reduction likely will require
balancing underlying norms of economic development and property rights more equally with compassionoriented norms aimed at reducing and preventing suffering. Changing strongly held norms is difficult and slow,
but norms can shape where information is obtained, how information is processed, and how decisions are made.
My central research questions are: Do Compassion Building Practices (CBPs) hold the promise to change norms in
risk reduction planning processes? If yes, how can CBPs be categorized, measured, and tested?
CBPs are defined here as 1) mindfulness program developed and empirically validated in the medical,
neuroscience, psychological and related fields as promoting positive emotions and compassion (c.f. Fredrickson
et al. 2008 and Flook et al 2015) and 2) modifications to existing planning tools and techniques to build on and
enhance existing norms of compassion. To date, little research has investigated whether CBPs can be used to 1)
strengthen the individual commitment of local officials and stakeholders to risk reduction, 2) enhance shared
understandings and commitments between stakeholders in risk reduction planning networks, and 3) generate
plans and implementation measures that prioritize reducing suffering for those most vulnerable to hazard risks.
This combination of outputs holds the potential to help reduce long-term loss of life, injuries, property damage,
and environment degradation.

This paper presents a conceptual framework for integrating CBPs into risk reduction planning. It draws on
literatures related to: 1) natural hazards and climate  impact risk reduction 2) participatory planning processes
and evaluation, and 3) mindfulness and compassion. It presents a typology of CBPs that planners can employ
and identifies a set of relationships between CBPs and other planning characteristics that researchers need to
empirically test.
References
 Berke, P., & Lyles, W. (2013). Public Risks and the Challenges to Climate-Change Adaptation: A Proposed
Framework for Planning in the Age of Uncertainty. Cityscape, 181-208.
 Burby, R. J. (Ed.). (1998). Cooperating with Nature:: Confronting Natural Hazards with Land-Use Planning
for Sustainable comminuty. Joseph Henry Press.
 Flook, L., Goldberg, S. B., Pinger, L., & Davidson, R. J. (2015). Promoting prosocial behavior and selfregulatory skills in preschool children through a mindfulness-based kindness curriculum. Developmental
psychology, 51(1), 44.
 Fredrickson, B. L., Cohn, M. A., Coffey, K. A., Pek, J., & Finkel, S. M. (2008). Open hearts build lives:
positive emotions, induced through loving-kindness meditation, build consequential personal resources.
Journal of personality and social psychology, 95(5), 1045.
 Logan, J. R., & Molotch, H. L. (2007). Urban fortunes: The political economy of place. Univ of California
Press.

Abstract Index #: 65
URBAN HEAT ISLANDS AND URBAN HETEROGENEITY IN INDIANAPOLIS, IN: WHO IS OUR MOST VULNERABLE
NEIGHBORS?
Abstract System ID#: 60
Individual Paper
YOO, Sanglim [Ball State University] syoo@bsu.edu
Despite the differences in regional climates, the Urban Heat Islands (UHIs) phenomenon has been addressed as a
common environment problem in urban area, since UHIs occur as a result of land cover transformations,
mainly the replacement of natural vegetation and agricultural lands by impervious surfaces which is associated
with urban  land_uses. As UHIs are mainly caused by physical changes of the urban environment, previous UHI
researches have traditionally focused on the causal relationships between physical land surface characteristics of
urban area such as land cover patterns, the vegetation indices and UHIs. However, as in the earlier study of
Eliasson (2000) in Landscape and urban_planning addressed, urban planners were interested in climate aspects
but climate knowledge had low impact on planning process. It is somewhat due to the lack of researches focused
more on the relationships between UHIs and socioeconomic, and demographic characteristics of urban area.
This research tried to fill this gap. The goal of this research is to provide urban planners further understandings
about socioeconomic and demographic influences of UHIs. With the summertime surface temperatures of
Indianapolis, Indiana, which is calculated using the thermal band of Landsat 7 ETM+ image, and other variables
that explains physical environment characteristics as well as socioeconomic and demographic characteristics of
study area, this study tried to link the spatial patterns of summertime surface temperatures to urban open
spaces, socioeconomic, and demographic patterns. This study hypothesized; 1) urban open space may work as a
cooling agent in urban area, 2) racial and ethnic minority populations may be more vulnerable to UHIs, 3) low
income populations may be more vulnerable to UHIs, and 4) above mentioned groups of vulnerable populations
may tend to live in the area with less open spaces. Relationships between summertime surface temperature,
urban open space, surface characteristics, socioeconomic and demographic variables were investigated using
traditional multiple ordinary leas squares (OLS) regression as well as Geographically Weighted Regression (GWR)
method. Since GWR framework allows local rather than global parameters estimation, GWR parameter estimates
were expected to provide more regional and neighborhood specific explanations of UHI effects. The objectives of
this study are twofold; 1) to quantify the magnitude of surface temperature variations in Indianapolis, IN, and 2)
to explore the biophysical, socioeconomic and demographic factors that are responsible for the UHIs in the same

area. This study tried to correlate variations in the UHI with physical, socioeconomic and demographic
characteristics of neighborhood in order to determine differences in exposure to high temperatures. The results
of this study will promote the awareness of UHIs to urban planners, diagnose current status of neighborhood, as
well as provide more proactive guidelines for urban planners.
References
 Buyantuyev, A., Wu, J., 2010, Urban heat islands and landscape heterogeneity: linking spatiotemporal
variations in surface temperatures to land-cover and socioeconomic patterns, Landscape Ecology 25: 17
– 33.
 Weng, Q., Lu, D., Schubring, J., 2004, Estimation of land surface temperature – vegetation abundance
relationship for urban heat island studies, Remote Sensing of Environment 89: 467 – 483
 Guharhakurta, S., Gober, P., 2007, The impact of the Phoenix urban heat island on residential water use,
Journal of the American Planning Association 73: 317 – 329.
 Huang, G., Zhou, W., Cadenasso, M.L., 2011, Is Everyone hot in the city? Spatial pattern of land surface
temperatures, land cover and neighborhood characteristics in Baltimore, MD, Journal of environment
Management 95, 1753 – 1759.
 Eliasson, I., 2000, The use of climate knowledge in urban_planning, Landscape and urban_planning 48, 31
– 44.

Abstract Index #: 66
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT: THE ROLES OF COMMUNITY CONTEXT AND CAPACITY
Abstract System ID#: 75
Individual Paper
MANDARANO, Lynn [Temple University] lynn.mandarano@temple.edu, presenting author, primary author
BLACKER, Brian [Temple University] tuf26584@temple.edu
MEENAR, Mahbubur [Temple University School of environment Design] meenar@temple.edu
This paper presents the results of research funded through an EPA STAR grant focused on assessing Philadelphia’s
Green Infrastructure (GI) program. This aspect of the four year interdisciplinary research project seeks to
understand the distribution of public and private sector investments in GI projects across the diversity of
neighborhoods with respect to indicators of community context and capacity. Where context is defined as
characteristics that inhibit and capacity as factors that facilitate collaboration within comminuty and with
external partners. Community context and capacity are deemed integral to the success of the Philadelphia GI
program as the Philadelphia Water Department is relying upon collaborative approaches to facilitate the
voluntary implementation of GI practices on publically and privately owned lands. The Philadelphia Water
Department identified nine collaborative approaches (Green Streets, Green Schools, Green Public Facilities,
Green Public Open Spaces, Green Industry, Institutions, Commerce and Business; Green Driveways; Alleys and
Green Parking, and Green Homes) in its Long Term Control Plan Update (Philadelphia Water Department 2009).
Private sector investments in GI mandated by stormwater regulations for new construction and major
rehabilitation also are assessed in relation to these two sets of indicators.
The research design seeks to assess two central hypotheses: public sector collaborative approaches to implement
GI program can result in inequitable distribution of GI practices related to each community’s context and
capacity to be an effective partner. Private sector investments in GI resulting from regulatory compliance are
influenced by market preference to avoid high risk comminuty resulting in disproportionate investment
patterns that favor low context and high capacity neighborhood.
The research employs a GIS-based model and statistical analysis to assess the distribution of GI practices in
relation to indicators of community context and capacity. Generally available demographic data was used by the
researchers to develop indices of community context and capacity using variables identified in the planning and
community development literature (Foster-Fishman et al 2007; Emery and Flora, 2006; and Chaskin, 2001). Data

for the location of GI projects implemented by the public and private sectors were provided by the Philadelphia
Water Department.
Final results will be available in time for a conference presentation. Results for voluntary collaborative
investments are inconclusive at this time. Preliminary results based on incomplete GI project data indicate a
positive correlation between mandatory private sector investment and community capacity. While preliminary,
this result supports the second research hypothesis and suggest there is a need to alter the current policy to
achieve a more balanced pattern of investment.
References
 Chaskin, Robert J. 2001. Building Community Capacity: A Definitional Framework and Case Studies from
a Comprehensive Community Initiative. Urban Affairs Review January 2001 36: 291-323
 Emery, Mary and Cornelia Flora. 2006. Spiraling-Up: Mapping Community Transformation with
Community Capitals Framework. Community Development: Journal of the Community Development
Society, Vol. 37, No. 1, Spring 2006
 Foster-Fishman, Pennie G., Daniel Cantillon, Steven J. Pierce and Laurie A. Van Egeren 2007 “Building
and active citizenry: the role of neighborhood problems, readiness, and capacity for change.” American
Journal Community Psychology 39:91–106
 Philadelphia Water Department. 2009. Green City, Clean Waters: The City of Philadelphia’s Program for
Combined Sewer Overflow Control A Long Term Control Plan Update.

Abstract Index #: 67
SEEING THE CITY FOR THE TREES: PUBLIC SPACE, CLIMATE ADAPTATION, AND environment JUSTICE IN LA
AND NEW YORK’S “MILLION TREES” CAMPAIGNS
Abstract System ID#: 94
Individual Paper
DEBATS, Jessica [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] jdebats@mit.edu
In U.S. city, low-income minority neighborhood are tree-poor. Because trees make streets measurably cooler,
this disparity increasingly  impact residents’ health as climate change magnifies the urban heat island effect. In
2007, both Los Angeles and New York committed to planting a million trees in partnership with public agencies,
private donors, non-profits, and property owners. Moreover, both Million Trees LA (MTLA) and MillionTreesNYC
(MTNYC) prioritized low-canopy neighborhood. In this paper, I propose to present preliminary results from my
dissertation, which measures each public-private partnership’s success in increasing tree canopy in low-canopy
neighborhoods, while analyzing how the distribution of public and private space shaped what could be planted
where.
Previous research on public-private partnerships has demonstrated that their social equity goals are harder to
achieve when there is a lack of public funds. My dissertation goes a step further by examining whether equity is
harder to achieve when there is a lack of public space. For instance, Million Trees is relatively free to plant in
public parks, squares, and streets. In contrast, private property requires the permission of the owner, who may
be more responsive to market forces than public goods such as environment justice and climate adaptation.
Therefore, I hypothesize that the city whose past development favored public over private space was more
successful in reducing tree cover inequality.
Different layouts and street and subdivision standards apportion different amounts of space to different uses,
shaping public versus private control. Such differences accumulate over time, producing disparities between
cities, as well as between affluent and low-income neighborhood. The distribution of public and private property
is likely to differ substantially between New York and Los Angeles, making these city ideal case studies. The
former enjoys an abundance of historic public parks, squares, and pedestrian streets, while the latter’s cardependency has discouraged the development of these traditional public spaces. Moreover, within each city,

low-income neighborhood have historically received lower levels of public investment in parks and other
amenities. Therefore, within each city, the proportion of public space is likely to be lower in low-income area.
Using tree planting records, tax parcel records, and remote sensing data, I will assess the environment justice
outcomes of MTLA and MTNYC from the start of the program in 2007 to the present. Specifically, I will quantify
the extent to which each program planted trees and expanded tree canopy in low-income, low-canopy
neighborhoods relative to the rest of the city, as well as the proportion of plantable permeable surface available
(and used) on public versus private property. To trace how past development distributed public and private space
with respect to changing local populations, I will visually analyze aerial surveys at ten-year intervals from 1970 to
the present, in conjunction with spatially referenced historical census data. (Because visual analysis is detailed
and labor-intensive, I will select two extreme nested case studies from each city: the census tracts with the
lowest and highest number of trees planted by Million Trees, normalized by area.) This historical analysis will
shed light on how past changes in the built environment shaped what was possible with Million Trees, as well as
the broader relationship between public space, environment justice, and climate adaptation.
References
 Loukaitou-Sideris, A., & Ehrenfeucht, R. (2009). Sidewalks: Conflict and Negotiation Over Public Space.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
 Rosenthal, J. K., Kinney, P. L., & Metzger, K. B. (2014). Intra-urban vulnerability to heat-related mortality
in New York City, 1997–2006. Health & Place, 30, 45–60.
 Sagalyn, L. B. (2012). Public-Private Engagement: Promise and Practice. In B. Sanyal, L. J. Vale, & C. Rosan
(Eds.), Planning Ideas That Matter: Livability, Territoriality, Governance, and Reflective Practice.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
 Southworth, M., & Ben-Joseph, E. (2003). Streets and the Shaping of Towns and city. Washington, DC:
Island Press.
 Vale, L. J. (2014). The politics of resilient city: whose resilience and whose city? Building Research &
Information, 42(2), 191–201.

Abstract Index #: 68
ENVIRONMENTAL AWARENESS AND CONSUMPTION PATTERNS AMONG DIRECT ECOSYSTEM SERVICE USERS IN
AN URBAN TROPICAL WATERSHED
Abstract System ID#: 96
Individual Paper
SANTIAGO, Luis [University of Puerto Rico] luis.santiago47@upr.edu, presenting author, primary author
TORRES, Ariam [University of Puerto Rico] ariam.torres1@upr.edu
During the second half of the 20th century, Puerto Rico’s coastal population grew rapidly, slowing down or
reversing forest restoration cover along the island’s coastal lowlands, and resulting in the degradation of
groundwater and surface water resources. Coastal natural resources were thus adversely affected (Barreto,
1997). Population growth was accompanied by a less stringent enforcement of environment laws compared to
those of the U.S. mainland (Berman-Santana, 1996). Due to its urban nature and rapid population growth, the
Manatí watershed is a location where ecosystem service degradation is evident. Its associated ecosystems have
been impacted by coastal development, eutrophication, and debris disposal for decades but there have been
minimal attempts to conduct formal studies of human  impact.
The proposed research will explore environment consciousness and lifestyles among the population benefiting
directly from ecosystem services in the Manatí watershed. We will use currently established measures of
environmental consciousness (Hedlund-de Witt, Boer, and Boersema 2014; Jiménez and Lafuente 2010) as well
as methods for the measurement of materialism and materialistic values (Hurst, Dittmar, Bond and Kasser 2013).
We will ensure that all used measures are appropriate for the local cultural context.

We will use a stratified sample with a convenience component to conduct interviews in three watershed sites.
Conducting interviews in situ allows us to ensure respondents are familiar with the ecosystem services they
describe and value. Three one-kilometer circles will be defined upstream, midstream and downstream. Our aim is
to conduct a minimum of 100 in-person interviews. We will associate consumption patterns and environment
consciousness with the delivery of direct ecosystem services, placing emphasis on behavioral recreation patterns
observed in situ. We expect to find lower consumption patterns and higher consciousness of environment
issues among those directly benefiting from recreation ecosystem services. Associating environment
awareness and consumption profiles with the delivery of ecosystem services would inform current environment
and planning education curricula from an ecosystem service perspective and inform key public policy on
watershed management and regional sustainable practices.
References
 Barreto, M. (1997). Shoreline changes at Puerto Rico. PhD Thesis. University of Puerto Rico, Mayagüez
Campus. 210 p.
 Berman-Santiana, D. (1996). Kicking Off the Bootstraps-Environment, Development, and Community
Power in Puerto Rico. The University of Arizona Press. Tucson, Arizona.
 Hedlund-de Witt, A., de Boer, J., and Boersema, J. (2014). Exploring inner and outer worlds: A
quantitative study of worldviews, environment attitudes, and sustainable lifestyles. Journal of
Environmental Psychology 37 (2014), 40-54.
 Hurst, M., Dittmar, H., Bond, R. and Kasser, T. (2013). The relationship between materialistic values and
environmental behaviors: A Meta-analysis. Journal of environment Psychology 36 (2013), 257-269.
 Jiménez, M. and Lafuente, R. (2010). Defining and measuring environment consciousness. Revista
Internacional de Sociología 68 (3), 731-755.

Abstract Index #: 69
TALKING GREEN: FROM OZ TO OZ
Abstract System ID#: 102
Individual Paper
GIBSON, Huston [Kansas State University] hgibson@k-state.edu, presenting author, primary author
DEDEKORKUT, Aysin [Griffith University] a.dedekorkut@griffith.edu.au
SIPE, Neil [University of Queensland] n.sipe@uq.edu.au
This paper is an extension of Talking Green in Red States: Stories from the Great Plains (Gibson et al., 2014) that
examined the communication strategies of planners involved in sustainability planning initiatives in the U.S. Great
Plains. We expand these narratives beyond the Great Plains to Queensland, Australia by interviewing planners
about their experiences when communicating and deliberating about issues of sustainability. Using a semi-formal
structure, interviews are conducted as casual “coffee talks” (Maynard-Moody & Musheno, 2003). Together, these
collected stories help us to understand how planners are “talking green” in conservative political atmospheres,
across vastly differing geographies using an international comparative framework described by Reimer et al.
(2014).
The paper presents comparisons between the collected narratives, concerning similarities and differences in
regard to the nuances of sustainability planning dialog. We relate the lessons learned about communication
strategies of planners working in sustainability in Kansas and Queensland to the broader discourse of planning
and politics, communicative planning and planning as storytelling, as they relate to sustainability planning in
challenging situations.
References
 Gibson, H., Wieters, K. M., & Brody, J. (2014). Talking Green in Red States: Stories from the Great Plains.
ACSP Conference Paper, presented in Track 12 (Planning Theory), Session 12.3 (Sustainability and its
Contemporary Relevance), Philadelphia.






Maynard-Moody, S., & Musheno, M. (2003). Cops, Teachers, Counselors: Stories from the Front Lines of
Public Service. Anne Arbor: The University of Michigan Press.
Reimer, M., Getimis, P., & Blotevogel, H. H. (Eds.). (2014). Spatial Planning system and Practice in
Europe: A Comparative Perspective on Continuity and Change. New York: Routledge.
Schon, D. (1982). Some of what a planner knows: A case study of knowing in practice. Journal of the
American Planning Association, 48(3), 351-364.
Van Hulst, M. (2012). Storytelling, a model of and a model for planning. Planning Theory, 11(3), 299-318.

Abstract Index #: 70
CLIMATE JUSTICE AND IMPLICATIONS IN CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION PLANNING FOR THE HURON RIVER
WATERSHED, MICHIGAN
Abstract System ID#: 105
Individual Paper
CHENG, Chingwen [University of Michigan] cchengla@gmail.com
Climate change-induced environment hazards refer to hazards (e.g., floods, droughts, extreme heat) that are
aggravated by climate change  impact in terms of their frequency, intensity, and geographical spread (IPCC
2014). Socially vulnerable groups—the elderly, children, women, migrants, non-whites, and the poor—are likely
to be impacted most as a result of unequal capacity in coping with disasters (Cutter et al. 2003). In the past three
years, the Huron River Watershed Council has been working with comminuty to provide actionable plans with
high priority climate change adaptation strategies to decision-makers in the watershed to improve resilience of
water resource sectors and their comminuty to climate change.
Climate Justice research applies an environment justice framework to examine the racial and socioeconomic
disparities in people’s livelihood affected by climate change. The field of environment justice has explored the
relationship between environment quality and socioeconomic indicators such as influence of race on the siting
of toxic and waste facilities (Saha and Mohai 2005). Several efforts are currently underway to develop
environmental justice indices, most prominently by the U.S. EPA (U.S. EPA 2014). Such indices have tended to
include measures of potential environment exposures at the census tract or zip code levels using publicly
available databases, such as the Toxic Release Inventory. However, no index to-date has taken into account the
anticipated  impact through empirical modeling of climate change on both local hydrology and populations. This
paper investigates empirical evidence for Climate Justice in the Huron River watershed with inputs from the
Huron River Watershed Council in order to provide a place-based assessment and information to sector teams
that will inform priority actions on climate change adaptation for watershed comminuty.
The Huron River watershed drains 2530 km2 and contains a population of 500,000 residents in 65 municipalities,
including major city such as Ann Arbor and Ypsilanti, Michigan, with diverse population along the mainstream. A
Climate Justice Index that reflects socioeconomic  impact of climate change in freshwater resources is developed
through syntheses of a hydrological model that examines climate change  impact on flooding hazards, an
environmental hazard index that includes locations of toxic and waste facilities with potential to impede water
quality, and a social vulnerability index that includes socioeconomic factors related to disasters.
Climate Justice hotspots are identified through spatial analyses and statistical methods for further spatial
planning efforts for climate change. The findings facilitate development of planning strategies for prioritizing
resources in area with the greatest social needs when planning for future water resources management and
community development in consideration of climate change  impact. This paper expands existing freshwater
resource research in the Great Lakes to include the aspect of Climate Justice. In addition, the integration of
stakeholders input in the process of scientific research demonstrated in this study serves as a transdisciplinary
planning framework for local climate change planning efforts in other comminuty.

References
 IPCC. 2014. “Summary for Policymakers.” In Climate Change 2014:  impact, Adaptation, and
Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), edited by C. B. Field, V. R.
Barros, D. J. Dokken, K. J. Mach, M. D. Mastrandrea, T. E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K. L. Ebi, Y. O. Estrada, R. C.
Genova, B. Girma, E. S. Kissel, A. N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P. R. Mastrandrea and L. L. White, 1-32.
Cambridge, United Kingdom, and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press.
 Cutter, Susan L., Bryan J. Boruff, and W. Shirley. 2003. “Social vulnerability to environment hazards.”
Social Science Quarterly (Blackwell Publishing Limited) 84 (2):242-261.
 Saha, R., and P. Mohai. 2005. “Historical Context and Hazardous Waste Facility Siting: Understanding
Temporal Patterns in Michigan.” Social Problems 52 (4): 618-648.
 U.S. EPA. 2014. “The environment Justice Strategic Enforcement Assessment Tool (EJSEAT)”. Accessed
on January 11, 2014. http://www.epa.gov/compliance/ej/resources/policy/ej-seat.html

Abstract Index #: 71
A SUSTAINABLE comminuty INDICATOR CATALOG FOR THE U.S.: A REVIEW OF METHODS AND USEFULNESS
Abstract System ID#: 111
Poster
MOSBAH, Simon [University of Pennsylvania] smosbah@design.upenn.edu, presenting author, primary author
BIRCH, Eugenie [University of Pennsylvania] elbirch@design.upenn.edu
LYNCH, Amy [Ohio University] lyncha@ohio.edu
In 2009, the U.S. federal government devised a national sustainable development agenda through the formation
of the Partnership for Sustainable comminuty (Partnership), between the U.S Departments of Housing and
Urban Development and Transportation, and the environment Protection Agency. The Partnership defined its
vision of sustainable development through six Livability Principles for policy and program guidance, and allocated
grants to comminuty across the U.S. for projects furthering this agenda. However, the Partnership lacked an
evaluation tool allowing participating entities at various levels to assess progress effectively and inform policymakers and the public about sustainable development. Consequently, many organizations, municipalities, states,
advocacy groups, and private corporations undertook their own sustainable development assessments. However,
their conceptual framing and definitions ranged widely, with some emphasizing the environment and others
giving weight to other factors (Epstein 2008, ICLEI 2009, Lynch 2011).
To remedy this gap, a team of planning scholars, in collaboration with the Partnership, developed the Sustainable
Communities Indicator Catalog (SCIC), a web-based tool that enables comminuty to benchmark and track their
progress toward sustainable urban development. The researchers crowd-sourced build-environment-oriented
indicators from comminuty around the U.S., while incorporating the latest research on these indicators’
effectiveness. The SCIC was launched in September 2014. It consists of a set of 30 priority indicators, spanning
housing,  land_use and transportation, scalable to comminuty of varying sizes and goals. Its searchable database
allows comminuty to select indicators appropriate to their projects and desired outcomes, making it highly
customizable. The SCIC also describes how each indicator relates to sustainability, offering instruction on its use
and interpretation, and providing examples of its use in U.S. city. This flexible approach, with a builtenvironment focus, stands in contrast with a comprehensive, high-level, globally-relevant and comparable
standard that ISO recently developed, “Sustainable development of comminuty - Indicators for city services and
quality of life” (International Standard Organization 2014).
This poster will present a dual assessment of the SCIC, answering the following questions: How does crowdsourcing for sustainable urban development indicators satisfy the diverse needs of comminuty with regard to
sustainable objectives stemming from the Livability Principles? How and to what extent is a resource like the SCIC
useful to planners?
To address the first question, we performed a quantitative analysis of 400 crowd-sourced indicators to analyze
how well they covered the different area of sustainable urban development, defined on the basis of the

Livability Principles. Our findings suggest that while comminuty receive useful information from a crowdsourced pool, this process has serious limits, particularly with the over-emphasis of certain specific goals (e.g.
tree planting) and under-emphasis of fundamental ones (economic development and equity). Expert groups
consulted during the process required modifications to the crowd-sourced indicators, emphasizing in particular
equity as a fundamental element of sustainable urban development.
In order to test the SCIC usefulness, the team also conducted an online survey of planners and other public
officials throughout the U.S. The survey sample consists of the Partnership’s grantees, and represents the
perspective of city, counties and regional organizations of various sizes, to ensure that the SCIC serves all types
of potential users. The questionnaire elicits feedback on how well the SCIC helps users to calculate indicators,
find measures that are relevant to their community, and generally track progress toward sustainable
communities. Preliminary results show general user satisfaction with the SCIC across the board, regardless of
community size or location across the country, which suggests that this tool can help planners to track
sustainable urban development.
References
 Epstein. M. 2008. Making Sustainability Work, Best Practices in Managing and Measuring Corporate,
Social, environment and Economic  impact. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, Inc.
 ICLEI. 2009. U.S. Local Sustainability Plans and Climate Action Plans. Washington, DC.
 International Standard Organization. 2014. ISO 37120: Sustainable development of comminuty —
Indicators for city services and quality of life. Geneva.
 Lynch, A. and Stuart Andreason, Theodore Eisenman, John Robinson, Kenneth Steif and Eugenie L. Birch.
2011. “Sustainable Development Indicators for the United States,” Penn IUR White Paper in Sustainable
Urban Development.

Abstract Index #: 72
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE AND ITS POTENTIAL FOR REDUCING FLOODING IN THE HOUSTON METROPOLITAN
AREA: A PRELIMINARY ASSESSMENT
Abstract System ID#: 113
Individual Paper
LEE, Hyekyung [Texas A&M University] hyekyung.lee@tamu.edu, presenting author, primary author
PEACOCK, Walter Gillis [Texas A&M University] peacock@tamu.edu
The benefit of green infrastructure has become an emerging topic of study and its potential use as a hazard
mitigation tool is receiving more attention in the urban_planning discipline. However, there are few studies that
have directly assessed specific dimensions of green infrastructure and the balance between green infrastructure
and urban development for enhancing community resilience particularly within highly developed urban area. To
date green infrastructure has been studied mainly at the community scale, utilizing very coarse measurements
and at the site scale using very site-specific details and characteristics. What has been missing is a more broadly
based assessment employing refined measures that will allow for the examination of the particular forms and
place-specific integration of green infrastructure at the community-wide level of implementation (Young, 2011).
For example, previous research has considered pervious surfaces, such as different types of wetlands and
undeveloped  land_use/land cover, to examine the impact on flood losses (Brody, Blessing, Sebastian, & Bedient,
2013; Brody, Peacock, & Gunn, 2012). Additionally, the adverse hazard  impact from rapid urban development
have been studied, specifically the effects of urbanization on runoff and  impact of development patterns on
flooding (Brody, Kim, & Gunn, 2013; Olivera & DeFee, 2007). However, the consequences of specific green
infrastructure patterns and forms within urban area for flooding has not been studied.
This study will seek to further the research on green infrastructure for flooding hazards over a 6-year period from
2004 to 2010 for Houston Texas Metropolitan area (1) identifying the amount of the distributed green
infrastructure, (2) categorizing different types of green infrastructure, (3) developing measures for the actual
forms, types, and placement of green infrastructure, and (4) assess the effectiveness of green infrastructure for
reducing runoff as assessed using stream flow gauge data. More specifically, in order to understand its potential

effectiveness for moderating the adverse  impact of flooding, a spatial assessment of green infrastructure
(amount, continuity, and connectivity) at the near neighborhood scale will be developed. The consequences of
these green infrastructure spatial measures for streamflow gage data will be assessed.
To undertake this study we will utilize here-to-for unutilized data to assess green infrastructure at an
exceptionally high resolution in urban area. Conventional approaches utilized the National Land Cover Database
(NLCD), Coastal Change Analysis Program (C-CAP) Land Cover data, which are at a 30 by 30 meter resolution. This
study will utilize satellite imagery data produced by the National Agriculture Imagery Program (NAIP) to compute
a Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) that will provide 1-meter resolution imagery enabling highly
detailed measures of green infrastructure, particularly within complex urban environments. Hence, this study will
present a novel approach for assessing green infrastructure and to utilize these new assessments to develop
measurements of green infrastructure form. Our results are also expected to provide a better understanding of
the consequences of green infrastructure integration on the reduction of urban flood hazards. Furthermore, the
findings will provide additional decision support tools and options for promoting flood mitigation for urban
planners, policy makers, and community residents as they evaluate existing green infrastructure in comminuty
and make decisions regarding the implementation of green infrastructure to mitigate flood damages and to
enhance community resilience.
References
 Brody, S., Blessing, R., Sebastian, A., & Bedient, P. (2013). Examining the impact of  land_use/land cover
characteristics on flood losses. Journal of environment Planning and Management, 1-14. doi:
10.1080/09640568.2013.802228
 Brody, S. D., Peacock, W. G., & Gunn, J. (2012). Ecological indicators of flood risk along the Gulf of
Mexico. Ecological Indicators, 18, 493-500
 Brody, S., Kim, H., & Gunn, J. (2013). Examining the  impact of Development Patterns on Flooding on the
Gulf of Mexico Coast. Urban Studies, 50(4), 789-806
 Young, R. F. (2011). Planting the Living City: Best Practices in Planning Green Infrastructure—Results
From Major US city. Journal of the American Planning Association, 77(4), 368-381

Abstract Index #: 73
PERCEIVED BARRIERS AND BENEFITS OF GREEN STORMWATER INFRASTRUCTURE AMONG NON-RESIDENTIAL
PROPERTY OWNERS
Abstract System ID#: 114
Pre-organized Session: Using Green Infrastructure for Stormwater Management
HU, Hong [University of Pennsylvania] honghu@design.upenn.edu, presenting author, primary author
HSU, David [University of Pennsylvania] hsuyd@design.upenn.edu
A number of U.S. city have recently sought to engage property owners in the development and management of
the green stormwater infrastructure (GSI) through two approaches, market-based mechanisms and public
education program. Market-based mechanisms assume that a combination of economic incentives such as
stormwater fees, credits and/or grants can stimulate the implementation of GSI. Public education program focus
on shifting people’s preferences, perceived costs, and moral benefits – often referred to as non-price incentives –
in order to change their behavior.
The perspective of existing literature on GSI adoption raises four key issues. First, existing literature has studied
barriers to engaging the private sector from the perspective of policymakers and private agencies. However,
perceptions of property owners on the barriers and benefits of implementing GSI may be very different, changing
expected effectiveness of program. Second, many of the studies of property owner perceptions focus on
residential households and rarely address non-residential property owners. Third, investing and installing GSI may
require complex decision-making processes with many physical, technical, environment, economic, and legal
aspects. Fourth – and affecting all of the previous issues – property owners may be highly heterogeneous in their
perceptions, motivations, and capabilities.

This paper attempts to identify perceived barriers among non-residential property owners in the implementation
of GSI, including the key technical, perceptual, physical, and economic factors that can enable (or hinder) its
implementation. Our study area is the City of Philadelphia, a leader in GSI practices among U.S. city.
Philadelphia’s Long Term Control Plan (2011) calls for the investment of at least $1.67 billion of public funds in
green infrastructure, and uses both economic incentive program and public outreach methods in order to
encourage non-residential customers to invest in and install GSI. However, to date the response among these
non-residential customers has been very limited.
This paper deploys survey questionnaires to measure property owners’ stormwater knowledge, environment
attitudes, perceived barriers and benefits and intention of installing GSI among four different groups with varying
knowledge and levels of engagement to date. Within each group, five non-residential property types are
included, i.e. non-profits, business, industry, education, and apartments.
Our hypotheses are that: (1) some of these groups value social and environment criteria over economic
considerations, while others instead focus on the economic cost of GSI; (2) the intention to install GSI can be
enhanced by economic incentive program and/or public outreach, and (3) these program will work differently
among the differently-motivated groups.
Results will be presented in the full paper upon completion of the data collection and analysis this summer.

Abstract Index #: 74
HAPPINESS AS AN ELEMENT OF PLANNING FOR SUSTAINABILITY - LESSONS FROM THE SEATTLE AREA
HAPPINESS INITIATIVE
Abstract System ID#: 134
Individual Paper
MILLER, Donald [University of Washington] millerd@uw.edu
The human dimension of sustainability – the balance of planet, people and prosperity – importantly includes
wellbeing that is a means to the end of happiness. Pursuit of happiness is an important feature of founding
documents for the United States. This paper explores what we think that we know about happiness, and possible
roles of urban_planning in fostering happiness of a city’s residents and visitors.
Developments in positive psychology over the last two decades provide a basis for this inquiry and focus on two
selected sets of factors. The first are those that contribute to happiness throughout life including health, arts and
culture, environment, and community (Layard, 2005; Hothi, 2008; OECD, 2009). The second are factors that
affect happiness at various life stages including during childhood, youth and education, working years, and older
age (Diener, 2004; Blanchflower, 2008). Thus a number of drivers of happiness and wellbeing are identified and
differ in their influence depending on stage of life and life situation. These inform developing happiness domains
and some appropriate measures for assessing them (GfK NOP, 2005).
A second focus of this paper is on the Seattle Area Happiness Initiative in Seattle, Washington. This recent nongovernmental program, begun by Sustainable Seattle, is inspired by the earlier effort in Bhutan to replace or
augment Gross Domestic Product with measurement and attention to the Gross Domestic Happiness. This case is
chosen because it is widely regarded as the first such program in the US, and because the author of this paper has
been a participant observer since its beginning in 2011. A description of the procedure used and a critical
assessment of the results of this procedure can be of value to other initiatives that similarly seek to address this
subject.
Finally this paper addresses urban_planning applications of happiness research and the results of the Seattle
initiative (Bacon, 2010). The categories of life domains and factors affecting happiness presented earlier provide
a framework for identifying how planning interventions can support and enhance the happiness of those

inhabiting city. Accounting for this in designing planning program and proposals can add to their effectiveness
and popular support (Frey, 2011).
References
 Bacon, N. et al. (2010), The State of Happiness – Can Public Policy Shape People’s Wellbeing and
Resilience?” London, The Young Foundation.
 Blanchflower, D. and A. Oswald (2008), “Is well-being U-shaped over the life cycle?” Social Science and
Medicine, 66(8).
 Diener, E. and M. Sligman (2004), “Very happy people”, American Psychological Society, 5(1), 1-31.
 Frey, B. and A. Stutzer (2011), “The use of happiness research for public policy”, Social Choice Welfare,
38(4), 659-674.
 GfK NOP (2005), “Poll undertaken for BBC,” Document available at
http://news.bbc.co.uk/nol/shared/bsp/hi/pdfs/29_03_06_happinesss-gfkpoll.pdf.

Abstract Index #: 75
MEASURING THE EFFECT OF THE FEMA COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM PROGRAM ON FLOOD LOSSES ACROSS
THE UNITED STATES
Abstract System ID#: 147
Individual Paper
BRODY, Samuel [Texas A&M University] brodys@tamug.edu, presenting author, primary author
HIGHFIELD, Wesley [Texas A&M University at Galveston] highfiew@tamug.edu
Increasing physical risk coupled with development in flood-prone area has amplified the adverse economic and
human  impact of floods in recent years. Losses over time stem from repetitive and chronic events punctuated
by major storms, such as Hurricanes Sandy, Ike, Katrina, and Rita (to name a few). In response to mounting flood
losses, planning researchers have proposed various non-structural techniques as segues to facilitating more
resilient comminuty. Most of this research is based on qualitative case studies or limited geographic scopes.
To address the lack of comprehensive knowledge about the effectiveness of flood planning strategies, our
research quantitatively evaluates, as a proxy, the ability of FEMA’s Community Rating System (CRS) to reducing
losses from floods across the U.S. In an effort to counter mounting flood losses, FEMA introduced the Community
Rating System (CRS) in 1990 as a way to incentivize local jurisdictions to exceed the existing National Flood
Insurance Program’s (NFIP) minimum standard for floodplain management and implement non-structural
planning techniques in an effort to promote the development of more flood-resilient comminuty. The program
has expanded greatly since its inception and now includes over 1,200 participating comminuty representing
majority of all NFIP policy. Flood mitigation activities under this program include education program, land
acquisition and protection, storm-water reduction techniques, and the adoption of local flood management
plans. While the CRS offers promise for reducing flood losses and facilitating the development of more resilient
communities, the program has never been evaluated at a national scale.
Using observation data and advanced quasi-experimental research methods, we conduct a comprehensive,
nationwide analysis of the role the CRS plays in reducing the adverse  impact from floods and estimate the
amount of dollars saved by implementing flood-planning activities at the local level. This study was conducted in
two phases. First, based on a nationwide sample, we compare how insured flood losses in CRS participating
communities compare with losses in non-CRS comminuty. Results provide a comprehensive understanding of
the effectiveness of the CRS program as a whole in achieving its primary goal. Second, we select 450 CRSparticipating comminuty as a nationally representative sample with which to statistically assess the
performance of specific CRS activities and their elements. Through this research approach, we are able to
identify the CRS activities/elements that have the greatest effect on reducing property damage caused by floods
and quantify in dollar amounts their expected savings. Overall, our findings provide scientific evidence on the
performance of flood planning measures and lend guidance to local planners on which types of mitigation
techniques are most effective in reducing flood losses over the long term.

References
 Brody, S.D., Highfield, W. (2013). Open Space Protection and Flood Losses: A National Study.  land_use
Policy 32:89-95.
 Brody, S.D., Highfield, W.E., Kang, J.E. (2011). Rising Waters: Causes and consequences of flooding in the
United States. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
 Brody, S.D., Zahran, S., Maghelal, P., Grover, H., and Highfield, W. (2007). The rising costs of floods:
Examining the impact of planning and development decisions on property damage in Florida. Journal of
the American Planning Association 73(3): 330-345.
 Highfield, W., Brody, S.D., Blessing, R. (2014). Measuring the Impact of Mitigation Activities on Flood
Loss Reduction at the Parcel Level: The Case of the Clear Creek watershed along the upper Texas coast.
Natural Hazards, DOI: 10.1007/s11069-014-1209-1: 1-18.
 Birkland TA, Burby RJ, Conrad D, Cortner H, Michener WK (2003) River ecology and flood hazard
mitigation. Nat Hazards Rev 4:46–54.

Abstract Index #: 76
INCORPORATING VALUES INTO STREAM RESTORATION AGENDA SETTING: LEARNING FROM ANYANG STREAM,
KOREA CASE STUDY
Abstract System ID#: 153
Individual Paper
HONG, ChangYu [Portland State University] 503changyu@gmail.com
Decision-makers of stream restoration (SR) cases tend to consider primarily the scientific methods and
knowledge, namely the advice of hydraulic engineers (Palmer et al., 2005; Lave et al., 2012). In particular, social
factors such as culture and history are neglected. The resulting stream restoration may not be effective because
the process reflects and indicates only one side of scientific improvement of the stream, and the projects
experience conflicts due to the disharmony among the diverse interests, including scientific and social factors.
This research addresses how and to what extent the participatory decision making processes incorporate
different values and visions of the stakeholders with Anyang Stream, Korea (Wang & He, 2010) as a case study by
analyzing personal priority of stakeholders with the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) (DeSteiguer, 2003). The
relevant data on stream restoration has been collected through semi-structured interviews, observations at the
collaborative meetings and workshops with the stakeholders, and documentation review.
My research first implements the AHP in order to research the case of Anyang Stream, Korea. By using the AHP,
this research will examine the hypotheses below:
Hypothesis 1: Conflicts in stream restoration emerge from contradictions between diverse interests. The
stakeholders in stream restoration collaborative groups tend to argue with other groups who interpret
professional/scientific knowledge from different perspectives.
Hypothesis 2: Participants think that water quality evaluated by scientific indicators will be most important factor
for decision-making, among diverse interests on the SR.
Anyang Stream, Korea is a great example of integrated basin management for the purpose of water conservation.
It is the largest lake in Korea and has a long history of social conflict related to natural disasters such as flooding
and water pollution issues in the community. During the industrial development of Anyang Stream, Korea
provided water resources for people and societies. Due to the transformative effects of the industrialization
period, a restoration of the lake became a serious environment issue, generating conflict between citizen
groups and governments (Bamba, 2011).
I will conduct both qualitative and quantitative analyses based upon the AHP method. From the gathered
information, understanding social and ecological system will assist illuminating why environment engineers

and scientists have been the main decision makers in stream restoration and provide potential recommendations
for mitigating the shortcomings of lopsided stream restoration.
In order to collect relevant data, semi-structured personal interviews with participants representing each
stakeholder group, as well as with scholars in the field of stream restoration, will be conducted. Most
importantly, the final documents issued by the local governments as well as interview scripts will undergo
qualitative (content) analyses Also, the AHP method will be used for ranking interests of each participant. To
analyze plan outcomes and citizen participation, the final governmental White Papers will be reviewed and
excerpted from the original copies at the public libraries in the Shiga Prefecture.
I carefully expect that my research outcome reflects that scientific factors are still the most significant factor to
be considered in SR and stakeholders who believe in scientific improvement in SR are still a powerful and
influential decision maker. At the same time, my research will be able to propose a potential solution of
participatory stream restoration, which existing scientific and technology oriented SR cannot provide.
Consequently, this research reaffirms the importance of collaboration and the collective contribution of academic
researchers, civil administrators, and the individual participants of interest groups in fostering active
communication among different values for applying sustainability in stream restoration.
References
 Bamba, Y. (2011). Integrated basin management in the Lake Biwa and Yodo River Basin. Lakes and
Reservoirs: Research and Management, 16, 2, 149-152.
 DeSteiguer et al. (2003) The Analytic Hierarchy Process as a Means for Integrated Watershed
Management.
 Lave, R. (2012). Fields and streams stream restoration, neoliberalism, and the future of environment
science. Athens: University of Georgia Press.
 Palmer, M. A., Bernhardt, E. S., Allan, J. D., Lake, P. S., Alexander, G., Brooks, S., … Sudduth, E. (2005).
Standards for ecologically successful river restoration: Ecological success in river restoration. Journal of
Applied Ecology, 42(2), 208–217. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2664.2005.01004.x
 Wang, Y. & He, B. (2010). Sustainable lake water resource management through integrated
ecological models and community participation. World Lake Database.

Abstract Index #: 77
DECOUPLING ECONOMIC GROWTH FROM GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS: policy FROM COUNTRIES THAT
HAVE BEEN SUCCESSFUL
Abstract System ID#: 173
Individual Paper
BRINKLEY, Catherine [University of Pennsylvania] brinkley.kat@gmail.com
Increasing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions can lead to climate change, associated with rising sea levels and
poorer environment quality (IPCC, 2001). For this reason, limiting GHG emissions has become a focus of major
international efforts, such as the Brundtland Commission’s report Our Common Future in 1987 (WCED, 1987).
Since then, researchers and policy makers have developed concrete goals to limit GHG emissions through the
Kyoto Protocol, adopted by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 1997 and
signed by 192 countries, though only thirty‑two countries agreed to cap their emissions. Of these Annex‑I
countries, twenty‑three have been able to reduce their GHG in comparison with the base year of 1990 (UNFCCC,
2011). Annex‑I countries aim to achieve decoupling, which is defined in this research as per capita economic
growth with decreasing carbon emissions.
This talk highlights planning interventions in countries that have implemented successful greenhouse gas (GHG)
reduction policy while continuing to increase per capita gross domestic product (GDP). Screening and reviewing
all countries in the world, I have identified the nine countries that have steadily decoupled per capita carbon
emissions from GDP. Changes in GHG emission profiles and pertinent policy from national case studies

demonstrate the built environment sectors most responsive (waste, residential, land-use change, and forestry)
and least responsive (transportation) to GHG reduction policy without import substitution.
A comparison amongst case-study countries and theoretical models indicates the most feasible opportunities for
successfully targeting GHG reductions in America, with special attention to waste management, food planning
from import substitution in the agricultural sector, and combined-heat-and-power (CHP) districts. Many of the
theoretical methods first identified by Pacala and Socolow (2004) were borne out in the above case‑study
countries with varying degrees of success: from a general shift to natural gas and renewable energy over coal and
oil, to across‑the‑board GHG reductions from biological storage in forests and agricultural soils. Other policy
recommendations, such as reduced reliance on cars or carbon storage in hydrogen plants, were not meaningfully
realized in any of the above countries, showing the lack of current feasibility. Contrary to popular policy
recommendations, the transportation sector remains the least likely to achieve GHG reduction despite significant
policy support and national funding program to sway practice. Comparison with theoretical models suggests
that planners and scholars could invest more time in assessing the outcomes of adapting successful, proven
planning policy, such as citing waste‑to‑energy CHP plants. Indeed, actualizing nationally supported waste‑to‑
energy policy will require extensive planning expertise at the neighborhood scale to ensure that unwanted land
uses are not disproportionately located in poor or minority comminuty.
Moreover, the unifying feature of the countries that have achieved GHG emission reduction is a public
commitment to the Kyoto Protocol. Many targets for future reduction in the case‑study countries rely on
national policy beyond the scope of the EU emissions trading program, showing country‑level conviction in
GHG‑reducing policy. Having not ratified the Kyoto Protocol nor committed to domestic policy, political will
remains that largest hurdle facing American environment health policy and realizing economic growth
decoupled from GHG emissions.
References
 Pacala, Stephen, and Robert Socolow. "Stabilization wedges: solving the climate problem for the next 50
years with current technologies." science 305.5686 (2004): 968-972.
 Brinkley, Catherine. "Decoupled: successful planning policy in countries that have reduced per capita
greenhouse gas emissions with continued economic growth." Environment and Planning C: Government
and Policy 32.6 (2014): 1083-1099.
 WCED, 1987 Our Common Future World Commission on Environment and Development (Oxford
University Press, Oxford).
 Protocol, Kyoto. "United Nations framework convention on climate change." Kyoto Protocol, Kyoto
(1997).
 Houghton, J., Y. Ding, D. J. Griggs, M. Noguer, P. J. van der Linden, X. Dai, K. Maskell, and C. A. Johnson.
"IPCC 2001: Climate Change 2001." The Climate change Contribution ofWorking Group I to the Third
Assessment Report of the Intergovemmental Panel on Climate Change (2001): 156-159.

Abstract Index #: 78
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE: CONNECTING COMMUNITY DESIGN AND PUBLIC HEATH IN DENVER, COLORADO
Abstract System ID#: 199
Individual Paper
WINSLOW, Jane [University of Texas at Austin] jfwinslow@utexas.edu
Closure of the 1990-acre Lowry Air Force Base in Denver, Colorado afforded an opportunity to redevelop the site
as an infill mixed-use community. Organized around Westerly Creek with a vision of preserving the art, culture
and history of the base, the project faced significant challenges. Spatial configuration relied on transforming a
section of the creek from a closed conduit to an integral component of a multifunctional green infrastructure
system, integrating biophysical and cultural components within the community. In this paper, I explore the case
of Lowry on two scales: 1) as a project in its efforts to realize the potential of green infrastructure as an

organizing framework for urban ecological infrastructure to promote physical activity; and 2) on the municipal
scale in its response to regulatory challenges and opportunities to affect change citywide.
Over the past decade, green infrastructure has emerged as a topic of significant interest in research for its
potential to advance sustainable urban_planning and design in terms of both ecological and human health.
Competition for land resources has interrupted ecological patterns and processes, fragmenting urban open space
and adversely impacting urban ecosystems (Benedict and McMahon 2006). Chronic health conditions caused in
part by physical inactivity, such as diabetes and hypertension, have reached pandemic proportions (Kohl et al.
2012). Lack of connectivity and access to urban green space has intensified the problem (Sallis et al. 2006).
While multiple and differing definitions describe green infrastructure (Wright 2011), a core group of common
planning principles has emerged: multifunctionality; connectivity; a multi-scale approach; and integrating
knowledge across disciplines (Hansen and Pauleit 2014). Several theoretical models exist, but there is a lack of
evidence to operationalize concepts and guide implementation at the municipal scale. To explore these issues,
my study was comprised of three parts. Through a content analysis of Denver’s comprehensive plan and
functional master plans for green infrastructure and parks I examined vertical and horizontal consistencies for
policies advocating the core green infrastructure principles supportive of physical activity. Interviews with key
participants documented the opportunities and challenges experienced through the existing frameworks of
policy, disciplinary boundaries, and urban form. Critical to the inquiry was the review of project plans and field
verification of as-built conditions in meeting stated goals and objectives. Identification of green infrastructure
principles and implementation of best practices informed the potential for the project to serve as a catalyst to
affect change citywide.
Results suggest strategies for incorporating physical activity were successfully implemented within the project,
although the green infrastructure developed to support such activity did not consistently reflect best practices.
Translating scale from municipal policy to project implementation presented multiple challenges, including
regulatory agency resistance to innovative stormwater management practices, and reluctance to change
maintenance operations to accommodate such practices. This inquiry is important to urban planners in its
contribution to green infrastructure discourse–testing theoretical principles through the planning, design, and
implementation of a built project within a normative framework.
References
 Benedict, M.A. and E.T. McMahon. 2006. Green Infrastructure: Linking landscape and comminuty.
Washington: Island Press.
 Sallis, J.F.; R.B. Cervero; W. Ascher; M.K. Kraft; J. Kerr. 2006. “An Ecological Approach to Creating Active
Living comminuty.” Annual Review of Public Health, 27: 297-322.
 Kohl, H. W., III, C.L. Craig, E.V. Lambert, S. Inoue, J.R. Alkandari, and G. Leetongin. 2012. “The Pandemic
of Physical Inactivity: Global action for public health.” The Lancet. Accessed July 9, 2012.
 Wright, H. 2011. “Understanding green infrastructure; the development of a contested concept in
England.” Local Environment 16 (10): 1003-1019.
 Hansen, R., and S. Pauleit. 2014. “From Multifunctionality to Multiple Ecosystem Services: A Conceptual
Framework for Multifunctionality in Green Infrastructure Planning for Urban area.” Ambio 43 (4): 516529.5.

Abstract Index #: 79
THE IMPACT OF LOCAL SOCIAL VULNERABILITY ON DAMAGE OF NATURAL DISASTER THROUGH THE 2SLS
MODEL
Abstract System ID#: 218
Individual Paper
SEO, Hye-jeong [Pusan National University] shj8308@gmail.com, presenting author, primary author
LEE, Dalbyul [Dong-eui University] dalbyul25@nate.com
HA, Gyoungjun [Pusan National University] hkj13579@hanmail.net

JUNG, Juchul [Pusan National University] jcjung@pusan.ac.kr
The purpose of this study is to examine the possible interrelation between natural disaster damage and local
socio-economic characteristics, and provide solution to expected problems if the mutual influence is overlooked
within hazard research. To achieve these goals, a literature review with a new perspective and quantitative
research using a two-stage least square (2SLS) model were conducted.
To date, hazard studies dealing with the relationship between disaster losses and local socio-economic features
tend to focus on one of two area : social vulnerability to disaster and negative impact of natural hazards on local
circumstances. Studies related to the former have identified disparities in damage according to socio-economic
status of the area (Mustafa, 2002; Pelling, 1997; Pelling 1998, Brody et al., 2010). These individual findings were
integrated into the concept of social vulnerability, which is defined as “the set of characteristics of a group or
individual in terms of their capacity to anticipate, cope with, resist and recover from the impact of a natural
hazard” (Blaikie et al., 1994). Cutter et al. (2003) determined the geography of social vulnerability for all U.S.
counties with indices including personal wealth, age, density of the built environment, single-sector economic
dependence, housing stock and tenancy, races, ethnicities, occupation, and infrastructure dependence.
Meanwhile, the impact of a disaster on a local community has also been verified by several scholars. Quarantelli
(1995) and Bolin and Stanford (1991) identified that natural disasters exacerbate urgent shelter requirements
and shortages of low-income housing. Frey and Singer (2006) asserted that natural hazards cut off local
communities and destroy residents’ social networks. French et al. (2010) established the concept of a model with
four types of social and economic consequences that result from natural hazard events: Shelter and housing,
economic losses including business interruption, health including casualties, and social disruption. In addition, it
revealed that disaster damage lowers local tax income through a quantitative method.
Two strands of previous research have implied the existence of a relationship of mutual influence between local
social vulnerability and disaster costs. For instance, while French et al. (2010) found that disaster damage had a
negative impact on local finance, Brody et al. (2010) determined that the financial resources of local government
can enhance its capacity to implement structural and non-structural hazard mitigation actions preventing
damage. However, most studies related to natural hazards and local consequences presume a single direction of
influence and do not consider any mutual effects, which creates a problem of endogeneity at the quantitative
analysis stage. Endogeneity can arise when there is a correlation between a dependent variable and an
independent variable, thus the model is decided in an interdependent way. This situation causes simultaneous
equation bias, which then makes the estimator inaccurate; by destroying its unbiasedness and consistency.
Therefore, endogeneity should be controlled in an adequate manner when quantitative analysis is used to
identify the relationship between natural disaster costs and local socioeconomic characteristics.
In this context, this study adopted the 2SLS model to identify the degree of influence from local socio-economic
features on disaster losses. 2SLS was used as an alternative methodology that can adjust for possible errors using
instrument variables and can assure the estimation of more validated values. In addition, Hausman-Specification
test was performed in order to grasp the existence of the endogeneity. Consequences of the analysis show
corrected results and suggest implications about both methodology and policy making. It is expected that our
findings can provide better ways to ascertain the connection between natural disaster damage and social
vulnerability features, which can support more suitable decision-making within a local context.
References
 Brody, Samuel D. et al., "Examining the Influence of Development Patterns on Flood Damages along the
Gulf of Mexico", Journal of Planning Education and Research, Vol.31, no.4, pp.438-448, 2011
 Cutter, S. L., Boruff, B. J., and Shirley, W. L. "Social vulnerability to environment hazards", Social
Science Quarterly, vol.84, no.2, pp.242-261, 2003
 Blaikie, P., Cannon, T., Davis, I., and Wisner, B, At risk: Natural hazards, people’ vulnerability, and
disasters, Routledge, New York, 1994
 Frey, W. H., and Singer, A.. Katrina and Rita  impact on Gulf coast populations: First census findings,
Brookings Institute, Washington, D.C., 2006



French, S.P.; Lee, D.; Anderson, K. "Estimating the Social and Economic Consequences of Natural
Hazards: Fiscal Impact Example", Natural hazards review, Vol.11, No.2, pp.49-57, 2010

Abstract Index #: 80
HETEROGENEOUS REACTIONS TO PRICE INCENTIVES PROMOTING PRIVATE IMPLEMENTATION OF GREEN
INFRASTRUCTURE
Abstract System ID#: 226
Pre-organized Session: Using Green Infrastructure for Stormwater Management
LIM, Theodore [University of Pennsylvania] tlim@design.upenn.edu, presenting author
HU, Hong [University of Pennsylvania] honghu@design.upenn.edu, primary author
HSU, David [University of Pennsylvania] hsuyd@design.upenn.edu
One of the major remaining sources of water pollution in the U.S. is stormwater runoff, which occurs when
precipitation is blocked from natural hydrological patterns and is instead converted mostly into surface flow.
Recently, city have begun exploring cost-effective alternatives to conventional drainage infrastructure through
Green Stormwater infrastructure (GSI), but implementation of GSI on a large scale is still in its infancy.
A key question is how policy can be used to build distributed networks of GSI that achieve city-scale objectives.
The planning literature has mainly focused on the environment and community benefits of green infrastructure,
and has focused less on how to encourage private owners’ adoption on a city-wide scale using pricing
instruments. The economics literature has suggested that implementing Pigouvian tax-like pricing mechanisms,
trading and credit system could incentivize individual actors to reduce the generation of stormwater runoff from
their properties, but is unable to address how to achieve particular spatial outcomes. This study builds on these
two different literatures to study how pricing structures could be used to incentivize the adoption of costeffective, GSI among targeted heterogeneous property owners and properties. Also, we seek to include factors
that are not present in the Neo-classical economic model, including imperfect access to information and the role
of targeted outreach program, heterogeneous responses to pricing, and the role of organizational complexity in
decision-making.
In this paper, we assemble parcel-level stormwater billing data for the City of Philadelphia before and after the
onset of the change in stormwater fee billing method, and joined this with socio-demographic variables, property
data, and neighborhood characteristics to evaluate property owners’ probability of applying for grants to build
GSI on their properties. We then utilize logistic regression and stratified data to estimate the effects of program
characteristics, parcel characteristics and neighborhood effects on the likelihood that a property owner will apply
for a grant to build Green Stormwater Infrastructure on his own property.
Initial findings show that a high positive change in the stormwater fee did result in a property owner being more
likely to apply for the grant. However, parcels that received water bills prior to the redistribution of stormwater
fees were also more likely to apply for grant than were new customers who had never received a bill from the
water department before the change in billing method. Lastly, based on the results of our model, we find that
increasing the stormwater fee does not result in a linear probability of increase in grant applications, and that
increased targeted outreach should be expected to have a larger effect.
Further results will be presented in the full paper.

Abstract Index #: 81
EXPLORING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN URBAN FORM AND ENERGY CONSUMPTION FROM A MULTI-SCALE
PERSPECTIVE
Abstract System ID#: 273
Individual Paper

LI, Chaosu [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] chaosuli@live.unc.edu, presenting author, primary author
CHEN, Yan [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] yanc@live.unc.edu
Urban form can be viewed from various geographic scales and classified into levels such as metropolitan area,
city and neighborhood. Normative principles for measuring urban form need to be developed at multiple scales
and carefully designed to address the different issues that arise at each scale. Meanwhile, urban energy
consumption cut across sectors and disciplines, which complicates relative exploration on the relationship
between urban form and energy consumption.
Comprehensive understanding of the relationship between urban form and energy consumption is the key
constituent of climate change mitigation. However, there is limited research on the relationship between urban
form and energy consumption at multiple levels. This paper proposes relevant urban form measures at different
levels, and clarifies connections between urban form and energy consumption from a multi-scale perspective.
The paper is based on the empirical work which is conducted in Ningbo, China. It consists of the following phases:
1) Typological analysis at different scales and choice of samples, 2) Spatial data collection, 3) Urban form
indicators calculation at multi-scales, 4) Energy data calculation, which includes transportation energy, embodied
energy and final operational energy. 5) Regression analysis.
In this paper, different regression models will be specified to test the hypothesized linkages among energy
consumption at different levels/sectors and urban form characteristics at different levels. At neighborhood level,
three OLS regression models will be used based on different dependent variables of the models: transportation
energy of the neighborhood, embodied energy and operational energy for the buildings of the neighborhood.
The independent variables are urban form metrics at neighborhood scale. At block level, three fixed effect
regression models will be used based on different dependent variables of the models: transportation energy of
the block, embodied energy and operational energy for the buildings of the block. The independent variables are
urban form metrics both at neighborhood and block scales. Fixed effects regression models will help address the
issues of correlated errors as is expected with this research design. At building level, two fixed effect regression
models will be used based on the two different dependent variables of the models: embodied energy and
operational energy. The independent variables are urban form metrics both at block and building scales.
References
 Clifton, K., Ewing, R., Knaap, G. J., & Song, Y. (2008). Quantitative analysis of urban form: a
multidisciplinary review. Journal of Urbanism, 1(1), 17-45.
 Ko, Y. (2013). Urban Form and Residential Energy Use: A Review of Design Principles and Research
Findings. Journal of planning literature, 28(4), 327-351.
 Ou, J., Liu, X., Li, X., & Chen, Y. (2013). Quantifying the relationship between urban forms and carbon
emissions using panel data analysis. Landscape ecology, 28(10), 1889-1907.
 Rickaby, P. A. (1991). Energy and urban development in an archetypal English town. Environment and
Planning B, 18(2), 153-176.
 Song, Y., Popkin, B., & Gordon-Larsen, P. (2013). A national-level analysis of neighborhood form metrics.
Landscape and urban_planning, 116, 73-85.

Abstract Index #: 82
CONNECTING THE DOTS: RETROFITTING INCENTIVES AND FUNCTIONAL GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE NETWORKS
Abstract System ID#: 285
Pre-organized Session: Using Green Infrastructure for Stormwater Management
LYNCH, Amy [Ohio University] lyncha@ohio.edu
Over the past decade, the number of comminuty including green stormwater infrastructure (GSI) in their
stormwater management program has increased dramatically. Despite the growth, there has been little research
on the strategies necessary to achieve a concentration of green infrastructure sufficient to impact water quality
and quantity and to reduce burdens on centralized system. Property owners are still most likely to install GSI

when they are seeking approval for a development. As a result, in mature, slow-growing, and contracting city, it
will take decades to create an effective green infrastructure network through land development regulations and
incentives alone. In these comminuty, retrofitting existing residential and commercial properties with GSI will
be critical in creating a connected network of green infrastructure projects that complement centralized
stormwater management system.
This paper examines the effectiveness of two types of retrofitting incentives - stormwater fee discounts and
direct financial incentives - and their prospects for creating a critical mass of GSI in slow-growing and shrinking
communities. The work is based upon case studies of three American city that employ both strategies:
Minneapolis, MN, Portland, OR, and Seattle, WA. Evaluation of green infrastructure retrofitting incentives in
these three city suggest that the main challenges are imposing stormwater fees and credits high enough to
persuade private landowners to retrofit their properties with GSI and encouraging a mix of green infrastructure
types in targeted locations to produce an effective green infrastructure network.
The paper concludes with recommendations for planning agencies and organizations considering adopting or
adjusting GSI retrofitting incentives. The experience of these three city suggests that comminuty should
consider the spatial and cost implications of encouraging different types of GSI, offer incentives tailored to the
needs of particular watersheds or city districts, and consider phasing incentives.
References
 Keeley M. 2007. “Using Individual Parcel Assessments to Improve Stormwater Management.” Journal of
the American Planning Association 73(2):149.
 Kohler M, Keeley M. 2005. Green Roof Technology and Policy Development. In Green Roofs: Ecological
Design and Construction. Marisa Arpels (Ed). Schiffer Books.
 Parikh P, Taylor M, Hoagland T, Thurston H, and Shuster W. 2005. “Application of Market Mechanisms
and Incentives to Reduce Stormwater Runoff: An Integrated Hydrologic, Economic and Legal Approach.”
Environmental Science and Policy 8: 133.
 Szalay S. 2011. “Stormwater Crediting: Leveraging private investment to fund urban stormwater retrofits
in Philadelphia and beyond.” Stormwater July-August.
 Thurston HW, Goddard H, Szlag D, and Lemberg B. 2003. “Controlling Storm-Water Runoff with Tradable
Allowances for Impervious Surfaces.” Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management 129(5):
409.

Abstract Index #: 83
ARE RESILIENCE STRATEGIES EFFECTIVE FOR RISK PERCEPTION?
Abstract System ID#: 309
Poster
PARK, Hyungjun [Pusan National University] wing4plan@pusan.ac.kr, presenting author, primary author
BAE, Kyungwan [Pusan National University] mwkw77@naver.com
JANG, Saewoom [Pusan National University] wkdtodna@naver.com
JUNG, Juchul [Pusan National University] jcjung@pusan.ac.kr
The purpose of this research is to identify the effectiveness of resilience strategies relating to risk perception. Risk
perception is the critical issue in coastal comminuty which are exposed to storms, hurricanes and tides. These
hydrological events create fluvial, pluvial and coastal floods. Worldwide, many coastal comminuty are
vulnerable these hazards. People pay attention to risk. Risk has relationship consist of awareness, worry and
preparedness (Raaijmakers et al., 2008): Awareness increases worry, which leads to preparedness which is a key
measure in reducing floods. Recently, it has been analyzed based on psychometric and cultural (institutional and
social factors) theory (Buchecker et al., 2013). Therefore, risk perception should be combined with natural hazard
management. This approach can be identified for improving resilience for natural disasters.

Despite these potential effects, many risk studies have focused on technical methods. Relationship of risk
elements (awareness, worry and preparedness) was shed light on (Bradford et al., 2012; Buchecker et al., 2013).
Even though resilience has become a significant issue in response to natural hazards in urban area, it comes with
a lot of challenges and needs acknowledgement and responsibility of risk among stakeholders (Bradford et al.,
2012). No matter how devoted planners and public officials are to devising a good plan, it is impossible to achieve
their goal without fostering responsibility around community flood risk. The strategies should be evaluated with
people who live in coastal comminuty (Buchecker et al., 2013).
Many studies have emphasized that mitigation is the core of community resilience (Godschalk, 2003). Resilient
communities can reduce damages through creative adaptation and capacity (Beatley, 2009). Following natural
hazards, adaptation at the community and city level can prepare comminuty against future hazards. Overall,
they are divided into structural (levee and channelization) and non-structural strategies (a natural hazard
mitigation plan,  land_use planning, regulation and insurance)(Peacock et al., 2010). Preparedness at the
community and city level affects the personal-level variables of awareness and worry. Though the strategies are
sensitive to stakeholders, their effectiveness have often been employed in scientific and economic methods
(Rose et al., 2007) and disconnected with people’s satisfaction (Bradford et al., 2012).
The following question is the main question: Are the mitigation strategies effective in increasing awareness and
reducing people's worries?
This research employs MLM (Multi-Level Modelling) in exploring the effectiveness of mitigation strategies. As
written above, strategies can be implemented on multiple levels (community and city). This is because worry and
awareness are affected by the individual effectiveness of strategies at the community as well as the
implementation of institutional strategies at the city level. To overcome these challenges, this research employs
the MLM method. To gather data, we conduct a phone survey of coastal comminuty in South Korea during the
rainy season. Dependent variable is people’s worries. The independent variables are categorized: awareness,
effectiveness of community strategies and factors at the city level. The effectiveness of mitigation strategies is
evaluated based on people's satisfaction. The control variables are personal and city variables. Personal variables
are risk awareness, age, income and reliability of public officials. City variables are durability of housing, hazard
experience, public finance and regulation.
The results take into account the interrelation of personal and city factors. To incorporate many different kinds
of variables, this research employs the MLM method. Using a creative approach, we can create a model to
combine risk perception and resilience strategies. Given that effective strategies are significant in this area, flood
risk managers and experts can be answered how best to provide flood strategies to people. Without the
understanding of people, flood mitigation policy are ineffective and liable to fail.
References
 Beatley, T. 2009. Planning for coastal resilience: best practices for calamitous times. Island Press.
 Raaijmakers, R., Krywkow, J., & van der Veen, A. 2008. Flood risk perceptions and spatial multi-criteria
analysis: an exploratory research for hazard mitigation. Natural hazards, 46(3), 307-322.
 Buchecker, M., Salvini, G., Baldassarre, G. D., Semenzin, E., Maidl, E., & Marcomini, A. 2013. The role of
risk perception in making flood risk management more effective. Natural Hazards and Earth System
Science, 13(11), 3013-3030.
 Bradford, R. A., O'Sullivan, J. J., Van der Craats, I. M., Krywkow, J., Rotko, P., Aaltonen, J., ... & Schelfaut,
K. 2012. Risk perception–issues for flood management in Europe. Natural Hazards and Earth System
Science, 12(7), 2299-2309.
 Peacock, W. G., Brody, S. D., Seitz, W. A., Merrell, W. J., Vedlitz, A., Zahran, S., ... & Stickney, R. 2010.
Advancing Resilience of Coastal Localities: Developing, Implementing, and Sustaining the Use of Coastal
Resilience Indicators: A Final Report. Hazard Reduction and Recovery Center.

Abstract Index #: 84
RELOCATION IN RECOVERY AFTER LARGE SCALE DISASTERS: INITIAL EFFORT ON COASTAL RELOCATION IN
POST-HAIYAN TACLOBAN, THE PHILIPPINES

Abstract System ID#: 313
Individual Paper
IUCHI, Kanako [Tohoku University] kxiuchi@gmail.com
Relocating coastal comminuty after disasters is becoming increasingly important. However, relocation is a
difficult policy decision because it may increase vulnerabilities of the displaced comminuty. Varying pressures,
including the need for urgency, mean that post-disaster relocation often proceeds without adequate
understanding of its complexities, risks disrupting pre-existing financial and social system, and exposes the
affected comminuty to further hardship (Esnard & Sapat, 2014). Recent studies on post disaster relocation have
begun to address the importance of community involvement. For instance, studies have shown that planning
processes that enable greater community participation help make relocation quicker and more effective (Sipe &
Vella, 2014). Additionally, there is increasing recognition that comminuty are capable of identifying their needs;
in fact their involvement improves post-relocation satisfaction levels (Iuchi, 2014). Nevertheless, there are
perceived difficulties in involving less privileged comminuty in the relocation process, as they typically choose to
continue living within existing conditions without considering relocation as an option (Oliver-Smith, 1991).
To understand initial post-disaster relocation efforts in less privileged regions, this research targets Tacloban City
of the Eastern Visayas in the Philippines. The November 2013 category five typhoon devastated the city with a
tsunami-like storm surge, accounting for more than 2,600 dead and missing and about 29,000 completely
damaged buildings mainly along the coast. Few studies have investigated the longitudinal relationship between
relocation plans and its actual implementation processes through the lens of community involvement.
Understanding the factors that affect relocation decisions in comminuty over time will help identify effective
ways to achieve sustainable post-disaster relocation in less privileged regions.
This paper analyzes data collected during fieldwork in March 2014 and February 2015. These include: i) Tacloban
City’s strategies and plans, ii) interview responses by central and local government officials, and iii) 72 resident
interview responses from the six devastated coastal comminuty (Barangays) on post-typhoon coastal  land_use.
Tacloban City was given the responsibility to lead rebuilding early on, which included the inland relocation of
coastal comminuty to align with the national “building back better” concept. A month after the typhoon, the
National Economic Development Authority publicized a rebuilding vision that emphasized a “no-build zone” to
minimize vulnerabilities of coastal comminuty to future disasters (National Economic and Development
Authority, 2013). Despite this vision, coastal comminuty had begun rebuilding in their pre-disaster land lots a
month or two after the typhoon, as if they decided to continue living along the coast.
Research results indicated that efforts to relocate inland are not only continuing but are accelerating into the
second year post-Haiyan. At the city level, a coastal “no-build” ordinance (Ordinance No. 2013-12-15A)
prohibiting any permanent residential construction came into effect in March 2014 and has been recognized by
coastal comminuty. The second year of recovery has seen the city government, central government, and the
private sector preparing permanent relocation sites to accommodate about 14,000 households, overcoming an
initial shortage of land and reconstruction funding. Perhaps most significant, the majority of residents in coastal
communities have confirmed that although they are currently inhabiting their former coastal area, they hope to
be permanently relocated inland. The community’s hope to relocate inland, however, could change at any time.
Continuing research is needed to understand the long-term processes regarding relocation and implementation
decisions as well as community responses.
References
 Esnard, M., & Sapat, A. (2014). Displaced by disaster: Recovery and resilience in a globalizing world. New
York: Routledge.
 Iuchi, K. (2014). Planning resettlement after disasters. Journal of the American Planning Association,
80(4), 413-425.
 National Economic and Development Authority. (2013). Reconstruction assistance on yolanda: Build
back better. Manila: National Economic and Development Authority.




Oliver-Smith, A. (1991). Successes and failures in post-disaster resettlement. Disasters, 15(1), 12-23.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-7717.1991.tb00423.x
Sipe, N., & Vella, K. (2014). Relocating a flood-affected community: Good planning or good politics?
Journal of the American Planning Association, 80(4), 400-412. doi:10.1080/01944363.2014.976586

Abstract Index #: 85
SALINIZATION OF THE COASTAL PLAIN THROUGH SALTWATER INTRUSION - LANDSCAPES IN TRANSITION
ALONG THE LEADING EDGE OF CLIMATE CHANGE
Abstract System ID#: 323
Individual Paper
BENDOR, Todd [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] bendor@unc.edu
Climate change is transforming the outer edge of the Southern US coastal plain. Lower-lying parts of this region,
characterized by extensive freshwater-dependent ecosystems, will be largely inundated by gradual sea level rise
by the end of this century. In the interim, however, ocean waters are already penetrating and influencing
freshwater-dependent coastal landscapes due to a combination of human and natural factors. This landward
movement of salinity from the coast onto the coastal plain or “saltwater intrusion” represents the leading edge
of climate change for many coastal landscapes. The salinization of surface waters and adjacent lands may lead
to significant reductions in crop and timber yields in managed ecosystems, significant declines in ecosystem
carbon sequestration in unmanaged ecosystems, and degradation of coastal water quality due to extraction of
soil nutrients by sea salts. As this region, and similar regions worldwide, transform in response to and in advance
of rising seas, the sustainability of these coastal landscapes hinges largely on a sophisticated understanding of the
coupled human and natural processes influencing salinization of surface waters and adjacent lands. In this
presentation, we will discuss a recently funded NSF project that focuses specifically on saltwater intrusion across
the Albemarle-Pamlico peninsula of North Carolina, an area with wide variety of  land_uses and characterized by
extreme socio-economic inequity. We will first discuss our efforts to create a comprehensive toolset – known as
the saltwater intrusion vulnerability index (SIVI) – in order to enable place-based, system-level understanding of
coastal system at multiple spatial and temporal scales. Second, we will discuss efforts to create scenarios that
will yield outcomes with predictive value in coastal system that are easily understood by stakeholders while
representing complex interactions between climate, hydrology,  land_use, and ecological processes. Third, by
focusing on how information influences individual preferences, we hope to identify pathways by which outcomes
could be used to enhance coastal sustainability. Together, these activities will help guide sustainable
management of this region and similarly affected regions over the next several decades to centuries.
References
 National Research Council. 2014. Reducing Coastal Risk on the East and Gulf Coasts. National
Academies Press: Washington, D.C.
 Arkema, Katie K., Greg Guannel, Gregory Verutes, Spencer A. Wood, Anne Guerry, Mary Ruckelshaus,
Peter Kareiva, Martin Lacayo, and Jessica M. Silver. 2013. "Coastal habitats shield people and property
from sea-level rise and storms." Nature Climate Change 3(10): 913-918.

Abstract Index #: 86
REGULATING ECOSYSTEM SERVICES AND USERS CONNECTION TO NATURE: THE CASE OF AN URBAN TROPICAL
WATERSHED IN PUERTO RICO
Abstract System ID#: 350
Individual Paper
TORRES, Ariam [University of Puerto Rico] ariam.torres1@upr.edu
Both biodiversity and regulating services are among the most valuable assets for traditional environmentism,
having a strategic importance in enabling ecosystem functioning and sustainability. However, traditional

conservation policy sometimes focus only on biodiversity and may lack a holistic comprehension of ecosystems
and their benefits at small scales. area where ecosystem benefits are not necessarily explicit still play an
important role as a life-supporting system. environment and planning policy need to incorporate valuation
estimates that include nature connectedness and services recognition of those related directly to the area being
managed (Schultz, 2002).
As a counterpart to the classic notion of top-down planning, tactical modes of environmentism can arise in the
form of qualitative, bottom-up approaches to local environment problems within unevenly managed
ecosystems. These approaches may provide a more thorough valuation of ecosystem services and allow us to
explore cognitive, affective, and behavioral components at a local level (Schultz, 2002). Also, including both
temporal and geographic dimensions of the environment, by focusing on individuals’ general relationship to
nature protection, their specific experiences and spatial attachment may lead us to comprehend individual’s time
perspective as short- vs. long-term interests (Schaffrin, 2011).
The proposed research will explore the nature connectedness, as a component of broader environment
awareness and concern, among the population who has a direct relationship with regulating ecosystem services
provided by the Manatí river watershed in Puerto Rico. We expect to find higher levels of nature connectedness
among those individuals that recognize regulating ecosystem services such as air quality and climate regulation.
We will use validated measures of environment consciousness (Hedlund-de Witt, Boer, and Boersema 2014;
Jiménez and Lafuente, 2010) as well as methods for the measurement of materialism (Hurst, Dittmar, Bond and
Kasser 2013). We will ensure they are appropriate for the local cultural context.
Preliminary findings reflect considerable geographic and demographic variation, hence, we will use a stratified
sample with a convenience component to conduct interviews in three watershed sites, defined by three buffer
zones: upstream, midstream, and downstream. A minimum of 100 interviews will be conducted in situ, which will
help ensure respondents are familiar with the ecosystem services they describe and value. Our results would
assist in offering key input to environment and planning education curricula, creating an open-source
environment for tactical environmentism and further research. In addition, help redefine regional sustainable
practices and inform key public policy on ecosystem valuation approaches and watershed conservation.
References
 Hedlund-de Witt, A., de Boer, J., and Boersema, J. (2014). Exploring inner and outer worlds: A
quantitative study of worldviews, environment attitudes, and sustainable lifestyles. Journal of
Environmental Psychology 37 (2014), 40-54.
 Hurst, M., Dittmar, H., Bond, R. and Kasser, T. (2013). The relationship between materialistic values and
environmental behaviors: A Meta-analysis. Journal of environment Psychology 36 (2013), 257-269.
 Jiménez, M. and Lafuente, R. (2010). Defining and measuring environment consciousness. Revista
Internacional de Sociología 68 (3), 731-755.
 Schaffrin, A. (2011). No measure without concept. A critical review on the conceptualization and
measurement of environment concern. International Review of Social Research, 1 (3), October 2011,
11-31.
 Schultz, P. W. (2002). Inclusion with nature: The psychology of human-nature relations. In P. W. Schmuck
& W. P. Schultz (Eds.), Psychology of sustainable development. (pp. 62-78). Norwell, MA: Kluwer
Academic.
Abstract Index #: 87
FACED WITH FOOD WASTE: UNDERSTANDING HOW THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT MAY SHAPE BEHAVIOR AND
ATTITUDES
Abstract System ID#: 388
Individual Paper
GEISLAR, Sally [University of California, Irvine] sgeislar@uci.edu
Food waste is the single largest material stream entering landfills where it generates 20% of the nation's methane
emissions. In response to statewide mandates for landfill diversion and greenhouse gas emission reductions,

cities in California are beginning to collect food waste at the curb to generate compost and biogas. These
approaches rely largely on technological solutions, yet they still rely on and must work together with the
everyday behavior of households purchasing, consuming, and disposing of food.
I will present qualitative and quantitative findings from the first and second phases of my empirical dissertation
research that seeks to understand and affect how household behaviors and attitudes change with changing waste
infrastructure. As more and more city ask households to start separating their food waste, more understanding
is needed regarding the effects of new waste infrastructure and how best to affect new household behavior.
Two models of community food-waste collection are explored; the first phase is in multi-family housing with a
"community drop-bin" system, and the second is in single-family homes with a curbside collection program for
food waste. Lessons from the first phase informed the second which scaled up the study design to reach nearly
600 households in a nearby Southern California community.
Households in both phases were asked to participate in an 8 week study. The studies included a pretest-posttest
survey design, weekly tracking of food-scrap separation, direct measurement of food waste diversion, and indepth interviews. Both phases measured the effects of food scrap separation on pro-environmental attitudes and
unrelated pro-environmental behavior, or spillover behaviors.
The difference in participants' environment attitudes from pretest to posttest was statistically significant with a
very large effect size. While it may seem counter-intuitive, this suggests that new behaviors made possible by
changes in the built environment may actually change attitudes.
Furthermore, results from surveys and interviews revealed three themes: the importance of "making it easy", the
balance between users and infrastructure, and increased environment awareness and spillover behaviors.
Almost every interviewee indicated that the provided infrastructure, such as the in-home caddy or the
community collection bin, made food scrap separation easy for them. However, while infrastructure made it
easier, I found that simply "making it easy" is not enough.
I will present lessons learned on how community or municipal efforts to collect food waste must balance waste
collection infrastructure and users, and how to help households balance in-home collection system with food
waste volume, bin maintenance, and frequency of removal.
Finally, many participants discussed how they started looking at waste and food differently, changing purchasing
decisions, and recycling more. Some even started engaging in other pro-environmental behaviors that were
unrelated to food scrap separation like purchasing cage free eggs. These results point to opportunities for
practitioners and academics to quantify spillover effects from policy implementation or changes in the built
environment to improve sustainable urban system.

Ultimately this work can inform the development of policy implementation and evaluation tools and efforts to
provide user-oriented sustainable infrastructure in urban organic waste management. Improving household
participation in curbside food waste collection program will help city achieve mandates for landfill diversion
and greenhouse gas reductions, increase awareness of food waste, and reclaiming food waste as a resource.
References
 U.S. E.P.A. 2012. "Sustainable Food Management: "Food Too Good to Waste". Resource Conservation
and Sustainable Materials Management. http://www.epa.gov/smm/web-academy/2012/nov12.htm
 Evans, D., Campbell, H., & Murcott, A. 2013. A Brief Pre-History of Food Waste and the Social Sciences.
The Sociological Review, 5-26.
 Dunlap, R. 2008. The New environment Paradigm Scale: From marginality to worldwide use. Journal of
Environmental Education, 3-18.
 Gardner, G., & Stern, P. 2002. environment Problems and Human Behavior. Boston, MA: Pearson
Custom Publishing.



Strasser, S. (1999). Waste and Want: A Social History of Trash. New York City: Henry Holt and Company.

Abstract Index #: 88
SEA LEVEL RISE IN THE HAWAIIAN ISLANDS: ADAPTING TO FUTURE COASTAL HAZARDS
Abstract System ID#: 391
Individual Paper
SPIRANDELLI, Daniele [University of Hawaii at Manoa] danieles@hawaii.edu, presenting author, primary author
PORRO, Roberto [University of Hawaii] rjporro@hawaii.edu
ANDERSON, Tiffany [University of Hawaii] tranders@hawaii.edu
Sea level rise (SLR) presents significant risks to coastal settlements, infrastructure, and sensitive species habitats
(Nicholls & Cazenave, 2010). Increasingly, planners, resource managers and policy-makers must identify how,
where and when to adapt to changes resulting from SLR while minimizing the  impact to human populations,
natural system, or both. Incorporating future hazards associated with SLR such as coastal erosion and beach loss
into  land_use planning and policy is vital to reduce vulnerabilities (Moser, Jeffress Williams, & Boesch, 2012). This
paper presents a probabilistic model of coastal hazards associated with SLR and discusses its application in land
use planning for the next 50-100 years in two Hawai`i coastal comminuty.
Local planners, comminuty and other stakeholders seek projections of SLR  impact, such as shoreline change
with a high degree of confidence and place-based accuracy. Most commonly, historical data or geometric models
are used to forecast hazards such as future erosion. However, the nature of open coast environments as dynamic
and complex makes it difficult for place-specific and accurate predictive models. An adaptive risk management
approach with probabilistic methods offers promise to improve the scientific basis for SLR adaptive  land_use
planning.
This paper first presents a brief overview of historical approaches to  land_use planning to manage coastal hazards
with a special focus on coastal erosion. We discuss the use of historical data on shoreline change for coastal
setback policy in Hawai`i and elsewhere in the U.S., and review different approaches to incorporate sea-level
rise. We then report on an empirical model of shoreline change in the Hawaiian Islands that incorporates future
sea-level rise. We use this model to produce probable erosion hazard zones and map overlays of the coast.
Future rates of shoreline change are estimated for sites across Hawai`i. We show that future distances of both
shoreline retreat and accretion are dependent on the local coastal setting and long-term sedimentation
processes interacting with SLR. We discuss the application of this probability-based model for the prediction of
future shoreline conditions as a coastal hazards planning tool.
The second part of this paper presents an application of this tool for  land_use planning in two coastal locations in
Hawai`i. These locations differ based on shoreline development patterns, short and long-term erosion rates, and
data uncertainty. We present how county planners, working with local comminuty could use the tool to
identify risks to properties, infrastructure, natural and cultural assets 50 to 100 years in the future. We use
probable erosion hazard maps to estimate exposure and describe potential  impact at the community scale.
Important factors for comminuty to consider in describing  impact are the spatial and temporal extent, and the
probability of risk based on data uncertainty (Bell et al., 2014). We show how comminuty can use the maps to
develop a decision matrix of priority adaptation actions that are place-specific. Through these examples, we
emphasize opportunities for comminuty to shape  land_use policy using a range of strategies that respond to
local conditions and incorporate principles of adaptive management. We discuss the benefits of the tool for
improving  land_use planning in the face of SLR, including the ability to account for regional variability in coastal
change, the explicit incorporation and management of uncertainty, and building in flexibility into future plans.
References
 Bell, J., Saunders, M. I., Leon, J. X., Mills, M., Kythreotis, A., Phinn, S., Morrison, T. H. (2014). Maps, laws
and planning policy: Working with biophysical and spatial uncertainty in the case of sea level rise.
Environmental Science & Policy, 44, 247–257. doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2014.07.018







Kirshen, P., Ruth, M., & Anderson, W. (2007). Interdependencies of urban climate change  impact and
adaptation strategies: a case study of Metropolitan Boston USA. Climatic Change, 86(1-2), 105–122.
doi:10.1007/s10584-007-9252-5
Moser, S. C., Jeffress Williams, S., & Boesch, D. F. (2012). Wicked Challenges at Land's End: Managing
Coastal Vulnerability Under Climate Change. Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 37(1), 51–
78. doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-021611-135158
Nicholls, R. J., & Cazenave, A. (2010). Sea-Level Rise and Its Impact on Coastal Zones. Science, 328(5985),
1517–1520. doi:10.1126/science.1185782

Abstract Index #: 89
DEVELOPING SUSTAINABLE RECOVERY ANTI-POLLUTION policy FOR THE CATASTROPHIC POLLUTION IN
CHINA'S HUAI RIVER
Abstract System ID#: 404
Poster
ZHU, Dan [University of Florida] zhudan@ufl.edu
Water pollution, whether natural or man-made, is a tremendous tragedy for people and the environment.
However, even the movement of water within a polluted river system can cause severe environment issues and
eventually lead to an even greater tragedy for all human beings. This study will examine the pollution dynamics
caused by agriculture and human activities in the Huai River Basin, China, the relationship between human
systems and natural system, and how mitigation policy affects the pollution dynamics of the Huai River.
The Huai River Basin is one of the most populous regions in China with a length of 660 miles located in east
central China. It is one of China’s major rivers and drains 67,000 square miles and support 170 million inhabitants.
Based on the China Water Resource Data, six billion tons of wastewater ran into the Huai River in 2013, and the
median wastewater discharge was five billion tons in the past decade (World Bank, 2013). The World Bank did an
environmental assessment report in 2011 that showed the concentration of Chemical Oxygen Demand,
Biochemical Oxygen Demand and Ammonia is ten times, eight times, and sixty times higher than the national
fresh water standard.
Previously, the Huai River had 189 reported species of fish and was one of the major freshwater fish producing
areas in China, but the number of species of fish decreased about 52% in recent years (Huai River Commission,
2013). The impact of the polluted river has negatively influenced people’s health in the Huai River Basin, such as
causing people to become more susceptible to developing various kinds of cancer. Some villages along the river
have negative a birth rate.
In 1994, the central government initiated the first comprehensive water pollution control program for the Huai
River Basin, but it only influenced the industrial wastewater load to the Huai River. Currently, the Chinese
government often only requires major industries to reduce wastewater emissions. As a result, there is no solid
system to manage the agricultural and domestic wastewater flux into the Huai River.
The goal of this research is to develop an adaptive water pollution mitigation policy that maintains and balances
the dynamics of natural and human system. These polices will specifically provide guidelines for policy makers,
local governors, water experts, and residents not only in the Huai River Basin, but also for other developing
countries.
Research objectives include: 1) identifying how the major pollutants affect fishery and human life on existing Huai
River Basin area; 2) developing a Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) model to determine how the capacity of the
Huai River reacts towards the various pollutants; 3) explaining how the new river mitigation policy is helpful for
dealing with agriculture and domestic waste; and 4) determining how these new policy will be accepted by
decision makers to make a real impact against the Huai River pollution.

This study depends on a combination of research methods. Total Maximum Daily Load Analysis will be used to
verify pollutant density and content matter in the Huai River Basin. Odum’s Emergy Synthesis (2000) and Brown’s
Pollutant Empower Density (2010) will be used to support the effectiveness of this research. David Easton’s
political system will be blended with other logistical thoughts to form the theory of this research. Three
successful river management case studies will be presented from an empirical point of view to propose practical
suggestions to control the Huai River pollution. Finally, policy suggestion will be conducted in terms of
agricultural and domestic waste management around the Huai River Basin.
References
 Odum, H. T., M. T. Brown, and S. Brandt-Williams. 2000. Handbook of Emergy Evaluation, folio #1:
Introduction and global budget. Gainesville, FL: Center for environment Policy, University of Florida.
 Brown, M., & Reiss, K. (2010). Landscape Development Intensity and Pollutant Emergy/Empower Density
Indices as Indicators of Ecosystem Health. Indicators for Assessment of Ecosystem, (Lm), 171–187.

Abstract Index #: 90
THE PATCH SIZE EFFECT ON NEIGHBORHOOD FLOOD DAMAGES
Abstract System ID#: 420
Individual Paper
LORENTE, Paula [Texas A & M University] plorente@tamu.edu
Ecological studies of city are relatively new. The provision and quality of ecosystem services are frequently
predicted according to landscape ecological theory, where ecological function is analyzed in terms of the spatial
structure of landscapes. A patch is the smallest distinctive landscape feature with ecological value that can be
used to describe or classify a landscape system. The general understanding is that, in an urban environment,
patches of green space help counter the negative  impact that impervious surfaces have on flood intensity and
damages by shifting the balance of the water cycle more toward evapotranspiration and infiltration flow
processes rather than runoff flow processes. Wetlands and forest, for instance, are patches of focal interest for
the study of hydrological services in urbanized area. However, it is not yet clear if it is the size of a specific
habitat patch, or the size of a diverse group of habitat patches that has a significant effect on the hydrological
performance of urban environments.
This study examines how hydrological services provided by urban natural area respond to changes in the size of
different landscape patches. The performance of hydrological services is measured in terms of neighborhood
residential flood damages in the Houston area associated with Tropical Storm Allison (2001). Land cover
characteristics of neighborhood in the study area are determined by using gridded and parcel-based  land_use
GIS datasets. Unique and diverse patches of urban natural area are described using landscape metric
algorithms. Controlling for other relevant socio-demographic and environment factors, the role of patch size of
urban natural space is examined in spatial regression analyses. Patches and diverse groups of landscape patches
are seen as critical for maintaining hydrological services within urban neighborhood. It is hypothesized that
large-diverse patch sizes of urban natural area correspond to reductions in residential flood losses, and that
large patches of high ecological value (wetlands, forest) correspond to greater reductions than those of low
ecological value (agriculture, open developed space).
Results from this research improves our understanding of how landscape structure elements can provide
ecosystem services in urban environments. A better understanding of the ecological performance of urban
natural space with respect to flood hazards can help with the development of  land_use adaptation strategies to
flood risk that would reduce potential flood damages to residential property.
References
 Kupfer, J. A., 2012. Landscape ecology and biogeography: Rethinking landscape metrics in a postFRAGSTATS landscape. Progress in Physical Geography, 36(3), pp. 400-20.






Alberti, M., Marzluff, J.M., 2004. Ecological resilience in urban ecosystems: linking urban patterns to
human and ecological functions. Urban Ecosystems, 7 (3), 241-265.
Frank, S., Fürst, C., Koschke, L., Makeschin, F., 2012. A contribution towards a transfer of the ecosystem
service concept to landscape planning using landscape metrics. Ecological Indicators, 21 (0), 30-38.
Tratalos, J., Fuller, R.A., Warren, P.H., Davies, R.G., Gaston, K.J., 2007. Urban form, biodiversity potential
and ecosystem services. Landscape urban_planning, 83 (4), 308-317.
Troy, A., Wilson, M.A., 2006. Mapping ecosystem services: Practical challenges and opportunities in
linking GIS and value transfer. Ecological Economics, 60 (2), 435-449.

Abstract Index #: 91
THE CONCEPT AND PRACTICAL RELEVANCE OF SPATIAL DISASTER RESILIENCE
Abstract System ID#: 424
Poster
LORENTE, Paula [Texas A & M University] plorente@tamu.edu
Concerns about the sustainability and resilience to disasters of urban area is now a driving force in urban
planning and design. The negative  impact of more frequent and devastating floods worldwide have led to a
paradigm shift in  land_use planning. The goal is no longer to reduce system vulnerabilities or to sustain a certain
level of urban services, but rather to develop practical means for comminuty to cope with change and
uncertainty. For the past few years, planning practitioners, emergency managers, and local decision-makers have
been tasked with finding ways to operationalize this goal and supplement traditional development plans and risk
management program with adaptation strategies that would enhance a community’s resilience to floods. Using
spatial theoretical principles developed in landscape ecology, Cumming (2011) offers the concept of spatial
resilience to describe resilience in terms of spatial patterns and effects. According to Cumming, just as patternfunction relationships are suitable for describing the integrity of ecological system, they are also suitable for
describing the integrity of social system. Therefore, another way of enhancing community disaster resilience is
by preventing the critical loss of desirable attributes in the spatial distribution of  land_uses, structures, and
natural amenities of urban system. The aim of this poster is to illustrate how the concept of spatial resilience
can be applied to  land_use planning. The study uses the patch-corridor-matrix model to examine the
relationships between landscape spatial metrics characterizing the ecological integrity of urban green spaces and
the hydrological services they provide. Residential property damages in the Houston area after Tropical Storm
Allison in 2001 are used to illustrate an empirical evaluation of spatial resilience using landscape metrics.
References
 Cumming, G.S., 2011. Spatial resilience: Integrating landscape ecology, resilience, and sustainability.
Landscape Ecol. 26 (7), 899-909.
 Lee, S-W., Hwang, S-J., Lee, S-B., Hwang, H-S., Sung, H-C., 2009. Landscape ecological approach to the
relationships of  land_use patterns in watersheds to water quality characteristics. Landscape and Urban
Planning, 92 (2), 80–89.
 Yang, G, Bowling, L.C., Cherkauer, K.A., Pijanowski, B.C., 2011. The impact of urban development on
hydrologic regime from catchment to basin scales. Landscape and urban_planning, 103 (2), 237–247.
 Botequilha Leitão, A., Joseph, M., Ahern, J., McGarigal, K., 2006. Measuring landscapes: a planner's
handbook. Island Press, Washington, D.C.
 Frank, S., Fürst, C., Koschke, L., Makeschin, F., 2012. A contribution towards a transfer of the ecosystem
service concept to landscape planning using landscape metrics. Ecological Indicators, 21 (0), 30-38.

Abstract Index #: 92
COLLABORATIVE IMPLEMENTATION ON US NATIONAL FORESTS: HOW LEVELS OF FORMALITY AND INCLUSIVITY
INFLUENCE EFFECTIVENESS IN THE COLLABORATIVE FOREST LANDSCAPE RESTORATION PROGRAM
Abstract System ID#: 425
Pre-organized Session: Collaborative Challenges on Working Landscapes

MONROE, Ashley [Florida State University] asm09c@my.fsu.edu, presenting author
BUTLER, William [Florida State University] wbutler@fsu.edu, primary author
This paper examines how recommendations for ecological restoration at a landscape scale are collaboratively
developed and integrated into the United States Forest Service (USFS) decision-making and implementation
processes. As the USFS embarks upon innovative approaches to collaboration after decades of legislation that
encourages public input and collaborative planning processes, the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration
Program (CFLRP) marks a shift as it requires collaboration through planning, implementation and monitoring on
landscape scale ecological restoration projects.
While collaborative planning has become widely practiced in public lands management (Wondolleck & Yaffee,
2000; Koontz et al., 2004), challenges emerge about how to provide for effective collaboration throughout
implementation. Collaborative literature suggests that formal processes create a clear decision-making structure
and provide legitimacy (Bryson et al., 2006), and more informal processes help generate the dialogue and
innovation necessary to resolve complex problems (Innes et al., 2007). Other normative principles suggest the
success of collaborative planning is contingent upon having an open and inclusive process with representation
from all stakeholder groups that have a stake in the issue at hand (Gray, 1989; Innes & Booher, 2010). In this
paper, we examine how different collaborative organizational structures can shape effective collaborative
implementation. The question this research analyzes is: How do the different collaborative organizational
structures perform in processing information, enabling dialogue among diverse interests, generating
recommendations, and contributing to the implementation of landscape restoration? We address this question
through a comparative case analysis of five of the collaborative groups originally funded under CFLRP in 2010. We
conducted more than 10 interviews with participants from each landscape collaborative (total of more than 50
interviews), analyzed numerous documents from the original proposals to annual reports, NEPA planning
documents, meeting minutes and other relevant materials, and observed collaborative meetings on all of the
landscapes.
While each collaborative group developed various organizational structures and processes for creating
opportunities for dialogue and processing technical information, they each performed differently in regard to the
generation of recommendations for restoration treatments. Through our comparative analysis of the different
collaborative groups, we find that the highest performing group was strategically and systematically inclusive of a
range of interests and formally established with a charter between the group and USFS. Meanwhile, informal and
exclusive structures struggled to obtain social legitimacy and were unable to develop and deliver
recommendations that were taken up by the agency. Moreover, inconsistent meeting forums made it difficult to
engage in dialogue, process information, or generate recommendations. We conclude with propositions about
collaborative implementation. First, we argue that while informal dialogue is crucial to collaborative processes,
formality provides legitimacy and transparency of process that can enhance consistent engagement in dialogue.
Second, inclusion of diverse stakeholders is critical to ensure that collaborative input is socially and politically
legitimate as well as meeting minimal legal requirements. These propositions refine existing theories of
collaborative governance while adding nuance to our understanding of effective collaboration in practice.
References
 Gray B (1989) Collaborating: Finding Common Ground for Multiparty Problems. Jossey-Bass Publishers,
San Francisco
 Koontz TM, Steelman TA, Carmin J, Korfmacher KS, Moseley C, Thomas CW (2004) Collaborative
Environmental Management: What Roles for Government? Resources for the Future, Washington, DC
 Innes JE, Booher DE (2010) Planning with Complexity: An introduction to collaborative rationality for
public policy. Routledge, New York, New York
 Wondolleck J, Yaffee SL (2000) Making Collaboration Work: Lessons from Innovation in Natural Resource
Management. Island Press, Washington, DC
 Bryson JM, Crosby BC, Stone MM (2006) The Design and Implementation of Cross-Sector Collaborations:
Propositions from the Literature. Public Administration Review 66 (Special Issue):44-55

Abstract Index #: 93
FINE PARTICULATE TRENDS AND AIRFLOW INFLUENCES IN CHINESE city
Abstract System ID#: 440
Poster
LIU, Chao [University of Florida] liuchao1020@gmail.com, presenting author, primary author
PENG, Zhongren [University of Florida] zpeng@dcp.ufl.edu
Strengthening airflow at city scale in urban_planning is proposed in many Chinese city to mitigate PM2.5
(Particulate matter less than 2.5 micrometers) pollution these years. Abundant studies in American city and
European city have illustrated the spatial and seasonal trends of PM2.5 pollution, and the correlations with
airflow patterns. However, the relationship between PM2.5 concentrations and airflow movement pattern in
Chinese city has not been well understood.
To solve this question, we proposed a methodology which includes spatial and temporal analysis, inverse
regression analysis and descriptive statistics to quantitatively evaluate the impact of the airflow velocity and
direction on the PM2.5 concentration. To demonstrate the usage of this method, we perform the case studied on
30 city which are chosen to represent different regions in China. In general, results indicate the existence
inverse relations between PM2.5 pollutants and airflow speed in 20 of all sampled city. We also investigate the
rest city to identify the reasons of different relationships.
Cluster analysis shows PM2.5 pollution in Chinese city having regionalism. Inland city are more polluted than
coastal city. Time series analysis shows that PM2.5 pollution in most city is highest in winter while lowest in
summer. Inverse regression analysis shows that PM2.5 level decreases when airflow velocity increases. The
marginal effects of airflow velocity are most significant in mega city and heavily polluted city. However, 10 of
sampled city did not show relations or perform other patterns. The reasons are distinguished in each city.
Impacting thresholds of airflow speed are in the range of 8 m/s to 10 m/s. Planners could use these results
guiding wind canyon plans or other strategies importing airflow at the macro level.
References
 Berge, E., Walker, S.-E., Sorteberg, A., Lenkopane, M., Eastwood, S., Jablonska, H., & Ødegaard Køltzow,
M. (2002). A Real-Time Operational Forecast Model for Meteorology and Air Quality During Peak Air
Pollution Episodes in Oslo, Norway. Water, Air and Soil Pollution: Focus, 2(5-6), 745-757. doi:
10.1023/A:1021378005618
 DeGaetano, A. T., & Doherty, O. M. (2004). Temporal, spatial and meteorological variations in hourly
PM< sub> 2.5</sub> concentration extremes in New York City. Atmospheric Environment, 38(11), 15471558.
 He, K., Huo, H., & Zhang, Q. (2002). Urban air pollution in China: current status, characteristics, and
progress. Annual Review of Energy and the Environment, 27(1), 397-431
 Yu, Y., Schleicher, N., Norra, S., Fricker, M., Dietze, V., Kaminski, U., . . . Stüben, D. (2011). Dynamics and
origin of PM2. 5 during a three-year sampling period in Beijing, China. Journal of environment
Monitoring, 13(2), 334-346.
 Yuan, Y., Liu, S., Castro, R., & Pan, X. (2012). PM2. 5 Monitoring and Mitigation in the city of China.
Environmental Science & Technology, 46(7), 3627-3628.

Abstract Index #: 94
UNCOVERING HIDDEN SECRETS TO SUSTAINABLE urban_planning SUCCESS STORIES: THE CRITICAL ROLES
BEHAVIOR AND CULTURE HAVE ON SINGAPOREâ’S INTEGRATED WATER MANAGEMENT OUTCOMES
Abstract System ID#: 451
Individual Paper

TIMM, Stephanie [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] stimm2@illinois.edu, presenting author, primary
author
DEAL, Brian [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign] deal@illinois.edu
Imagine a city located on a tropical island with towering skyscrapers, one of the highest population densities in
the world, expanding industry, a growing populace, no natural large aquifers or lakes…and a goal of becoming
water self-sufficient by 2061. This is not a fantasy - it is the reality of Singapore. Much to the world’s surprise
Singapore is well on it’s way to meeting their goal of independence from imported Malaysian water. In fact,
between 1998 and 2013 Singapore has steadily reduced its per capita domestic water consumption by more than
9 percent - from 166 to 151 liters per person each day. During this same period they have implemented (and
reportedly gained public acceptance for) the largest municipal recycled water system in the world (NEWater) – a
huge feat considering the psychological hurdles (i.e. the ‘yuck’ factor) that has prevented many other water
scarce city from adapting similar technology (PUB, 2013).
The sustainability of potable water system is not a problem unique to Singapore. In fact, planners, diplomats,
and engineers from water scarce area around the world have traveled there to learn from Singapore’s water
practices firsthand. Visitors often find this experience to be inspiring, enlightening, and indicative social proof
that Singapore’s water strategies work (Singapore Public Utilities Board, 2013). What may not be as apparent,
however, is if Singapore’s successful integrated water management strategies would work as well in vastly
different cultural contexts.
This mixed-method study discerns the key cultural and behavioral factors behind Singapore’s’ two most
successful Integrated Water Management results – the implementation of NEWater and the significant decrease
in per capita household water consumption. Ajzen’s Theory of Planned Behavior serves as a theoretical base for
the analysis of data collected through a combination of participant observation, semi-structured interviews and a
nationally representative survey in Singapore. Each method uncovers distinct layers of behavioral and cultural
detail, which are then linked with more generalizable dimensions of national culture such as power distance and
collectivism/individualism (Holfstede, 2003). Finally, a new framework for understanding cross-cultural ‘success
stories’ is proposed. It is expected that this framework will help urban_planning practitioners better understand
the often tacit and elusive cultural component that make many sustainable strategies referenced from abroad
successful in their original context.
References
 Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 50(2), 179–211. doi:10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020-T
 Ching, L. (2010). Eliminating “Yuck”: A Simple Exposition of Media and Social Change in Water Reuse
Policies. International Journal of Water Resources Development, 26(1), 111–124.
doi:10.1080/07900620903392174
 Hofstede. (2001). Culture’s Consequences: Comparing Values, Behaviors, Institutions and Organizations
Across Nations. SAGE.
 Singapore Public Utilities Board. (2013). The Singapore Water Story [Government]. Retrieved from
http://www.pub.gov.sg/water/Pages/singaporewaterstory.aspx
 Wester, J., Timpano, K. R., Çek, D., Lieberman, D., Fieldstone, S. C., & Broad, K. (2015). Psychological and
social factors associated with wastewater reuse emotional discomfort. Journal of environment
Psychology, 42, 16–23. doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2015.01.003

Abstract Index #: 95
UNSUSTAINABILITY AS A CHRONIC, MANAGEABLE DISEASE? ALTERNATIVES TO SUSTAINABILITY-ASEQUILIBRIUM
Abstract System ID#: 491
Pre-organized Session: Justice, Sustainability & the City: Possible Paths
CAMPBELL, Scott [University of Michigan] sdcamp@umich.edu

“Chronic Disease is a long-lasting condition that can be controlled but not cured. …. Although chronic diseases
are among the most common and costly health problems, they are also among the most preventable and most
can be effectively controlled.” (CMDC, 2011)
This paper critiques the prevailing conception of sustainable urbanism as equilibrium and proposes an
alternative: treat environment unsustainability as a chronic manageable disease. Through the examination of
urban sustainability, population health and political economy texts, I contrast these alternative stances towards
sustainability: striving for balance (between social, environment and economic priorities), or managing our
unsustainable urban system to minimize damage and buy time to enable adaptation and restoration. This is not
just a debate between two abstractions: these two approaches lead to divergent political rhetorics, planning
designs and measures of sustainability.
If “sustainability” once suggested restoring the equilibrium of an urban-ecological system (i.e., a steady state of
resource and  land_uses), we may eventually grow more comfortable with the idea that sustainability is dynamic,
unpredictable and unstable, plagued with internal contradictions. Sustainability contains contradictions not just
because of the tensions between planning’s three goals (economic development, environment protection and
social justice), but also because the very idea is contrary to the modern capitalist condition of restless growth —
of ceaseless extraction, commodification and abandonment. In our era of creative destruction, the best we can
achieve may be hybrid landscapes of the sustained and the transitory: a viable compromise between sustainable
and unsustainable practices. We will likely not know, in the long run of history, whether human life is intrinsically
unsustainable or whether mass urban society can live “in harmony” with nature. Planning’s contribution is to
carve out habitat niches that support life, in a volatile world, for a diverse array of populations with a minimum of
misery and disparity. One can’t “cure” unsustainability. But one can treat it as a chronic, increasingly manageable
disease: to incrementally transform a once fatal environment deterioration into a tolerable condition.
This manageable tension better matches the practices and internal contractions of planning itself. Though
planning portrays itself as a modest yet heroic profession on the side of the underdog (whether nature or
neighbor), these contradictions repeatedly pull the field in conflicting directions. It is not institutional
schizophrenia, but rather a systemic outcome of planning’s embedded role in the complex network of public
service, political economy and the built environment, that steers the profession through the contradictions of
urbanization, social justice and sustainability. Our profession works to both aggressively expand metropolitan
boundaries and erect greenbelt bulwarks to conserve the natural and historic landscapes; we both submissively
serve the economic mandates of the elite urban growth machine and advocate for the impoverished and
disenfranchised urban dwellers. These activities are not primarily about striking a balance, but rather about
managing conflicting priorities, capitalizing on overlapping interests, seeking pragmatic solutions, and asserting
the power of good design.
I connect this shifting view of sustainability to two emerging public debates. First, the current fascination with
resilience has spurred sustainability advocates to acknowledge that the world is volatile and full of threats both
acute and chronic — even if the resilience literature itself sometimes reveals a stalwart belief in equilibrium. The
second is climate change, which — by irreversibly throwing the global climate system out of balance — has
upended the adequacy of sustainability-as-equilibrium maintenance. Climate change has also given greater
legitimacy to adaptation (once rejected as a sign of timid acquiesce) as a lamentable but unavoidable
complement to mitigation.
References
 Agyeman, Julian. 2005. Sustainable comminuty and the Challenge of environment Justice. New York,
NY, USA: New York University Press.
 Brenner, Neil, Peter Marcuse, and Margit Mayer. 2012. city for people, not for profit: critical urban
theory and the right to the city. Abingdon; New York: Routledge.
 Campbell, Scott D. 2013. "Sustainable Development and Social Justice: Conflicting Urgencies and the
Search for Common Ground in Urban and Regional Planning." Michigan Journal of Sustainability 1:7591.




Evans, Peter, ed. 2002. Livable city? Urban Struggles for Livelihood and Sustainability. Berkeley, Los
Angeles, London: University of California Press.
Oden, Michael D. 2010. "Equity: The Forgotten E in Sustainable Development." In Pragmatic
sustainability: theoretical and practical tools, edited by Steven A. Moore, 31-49. London; New York, NY:
Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 96
ECONOMIC COSTS OF A SHRINKING LAKE MEAD
Abstract System ID#: 499
Individual Paper
SINGH, Amrita [University of California, Irvine] amritas@uci.edu, presenting author, primary author
SAPHORES, JeanDaniel [University of California, Irvine] saphores@uci.edu
Persistent arid conditions and a growing urban populations have drastically reduced the once-mighty Colorado
River. This has led to the visible reduction of lake reservoirs all over the Southwest. Lake Mead, due to its
importance as a major source of water supply for Las Vegas residence, has received a great deal of media
attention displaying the “bathtub ring” around the edge of the lake exposing surrounding rock that used to be
underwater (Hobson, 2014; Tracy, 2014). Lake Mead’s water levels have been gradually decreasing since 1983;
however, the rate of decrease has been fairly drastic since 2010 (Allen, 2003; NASA, 2010). The recent drop in
water levels has caused local marinas to close, thereby affecting the aesthetic and recreational value of the lake.
Although several studies documented local  impact of water quality, we know of no studies that evaluated how
shrinking water levels are capitalized in surrounding properties.
In order to address the cost associated with the degradation of Lake Mead, we propose a spatial hedonic analysis
of home values in nearby Boulder City, NV. Lake Mead as well as the surrounding land is a designated National
Recreation Area (NRA). The lake is a protected area and does not have development adjacent to the water.
Instead, all local and tourist related development (e.g. hotels, restaurants, boat rentals, etc) are in Boulder City,
four miles from the lake. While most hedonic studies evaluate properties adjacent in order to establish the
amenity effect associated with water quality, this study will focus on how drops in water levels  impact the value
of recreational access to the lake, as well as the premium associated with views of the lake.
Walsh et. al., 2011 found that surface area of the water body as well as water quality improvements had a
significant and positive impact on non-waterfront homes as well as waterfront homes. Suggesting that size of a
watershed does matter. Phaneuf and colleagues (2008) point out that water quality often affects local
neighborhoods and local recreation access. They find that an individual, when choosing a home, considers the
availability and quality of local recreation sites for short outings. They further find that changes in water quality
affect the value of recreation access as well as the amenity value of proximity. Both studies support the inclusion
of non-waterfront property in hedonic pricing models. Their results suggest that water conditions can affect
households that utilize water bodies for short day trips, thereby influencing consumers’ residential choices and
subsequently home values.
In an effort to capture the effects associated with water level drops and avoid potential problems associated with
the 2008 recession, we will analyze home sales in 2010-2013. The spatial hedonic models will relate real estate
data for Boulder city from Dataquick’s Clark County file to measurements water level from the US Bureau of
Reclamation.
This study will contribute to water related hedonic studies in two ways. First, while other hedonic studies
evaluate water quality, this study will quantify the economic impact of shrinking water levels, a critical
consequence of recent climate patterns that is likely to continue. Second, our work will evaluate the effect of a
shrinking lake on non-adjacent properties to assess whether the health of water bodies  impact more than just
waterfront properties. By quantifying the material cost associated with environment deterioration, we will

provide voters and decision maker’s additional information regarding the economic costs of environment
degradation
References
 Allen, J. (2003). Drought Lowers Lake Mead. Earth Observatory, from
http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/LakeMead/
 Hobson, J. (Writer). (2014). America’s Largest Reservoir Keeps Shrinking [Radio]: WBUR.
 NASA. (2010). Lake Mead Water Level Reached Historic Low. from
http://www.globalwaterintel.com/archive/11/12/analysis/chart-month-lake-mead-water-level-reacheshistoric-low.html
 Phaneuf, D. J., Smith, V. K., Palmquist, R. B., & Pope, J. C. (2008). Integrating property value and local
recreation models to value ecosystem services in urban watersheds. Land Economics, 84(3), 361-381.
 Walsh, P. J., Milon, J. W., & Scrogin, D. O. (2011). The spatial extent of water quality benefits in urban
housing markets. Land Economics, 87(4), 628-644.
Abstract Index #: 97
ENERGY-EFFICIENT RE-USE OF EXISTING COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS
Abstract System ID#: 502
Individual Paper
ANDREWS, Clinton [Rutgers University] cja1@rutgers.edu
Increased demand for urban living, financial incentives for redevelopment, and conducive planning regulations
are leading to significant commercial building re-use. This trend represents an opportunity to upgrade the energy
performance of the existing building stock in older, more walkable downtowns, and to achieve preservation
goals. However, some advocates of building re-use resist imposing the cost of energy improvements on
associated projects, while many energy efficiency advocates do not distinguish key distinctions between existing
and new buildings. Building code officials experience this tension when reviewing improvements to existing
buildings, and many find that sections of the widely-adopted International Energy Conservation Code are
pragmatically unenforceable. This paper characterizes the challenge using evidence from a regional survey of
code officials and interviews with redevelopers.
The paper then explores how to improve outcomes. First, it tests policy alternatives on a representative sample
of the U.S. commercial building stock, the U.S. Department of Energy’s Commercial Building Energy Consumption
Survey (CBECS). Combining CBECS and CoStar data, it then investigates how these policy might differentially
affect the commercial building stock of contrasting towns (one compact and historic, the other sprawling) in the
Greater Philadelphia region. A case study of a specific renovation project illustrates the policy implications.
Promising regulatory strategies that emerge from this analysis include exempting smaller buildings and less
energy-intensive occupancies and system, and creating simple lookup tables that provide succinct guidance to
redevelopers and code officials.
This paper is relevant to planning practice and public policy because code officials enforce longstanding life-safety
codes more assiduously than they do the newer energy codes, and it appears that these codes need revisions to
make them more cost-effective and enforceable. A better understanding and implementation of building energy
codes can have positive implications for both energy performance and downtown revitalization. This paper
advances planning education by highlighting interdependencies among the national policy objective of energy
efficiency, the ubiquitous local planning objective of downtown revitalization, and the details of regulating
construction practices in existing buildings.
References
 Burby, Raymond J., Salvesen, David, and Mike Creed. (2006).Encouraging Residential Rehabilitation with
Building Codes: New Jersey’s Experience. Journal of the American Planning Association 72(2):183-196.
 Galvan, Sara C. (2006). Rehabilitating Rehab through State Building Codes. The Yale Law Journal 115(7):
1744-1781.





Hsu, D. (2014). How much information disclosure of building energy performance is necessary? Energy
Policy, 64, 263–272. doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2013.08.094.
Listokin, David, and David B. Hattis. (2005). Building Codes and Housing. Cityscape: A Journal of Policy
Development and Research 8(1): 21-67.
Zhang, J., Xie, Y., Athalye, R., Goel, S., Hart, R., Mendon, V., Rosenberg, M., and B Liu. (2013). Energy and
Energy Cost Savings Analysis of the IECC for Commercial Buildings. Report No. PNNL-22760 prepared for
the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract DE-AC05-76RL01830. Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory, Richland, Washington.

Abstract Index #: 98
TOWARDS SUSTAINABLE WATER RESOURCE PLANNING IN SIEM REAP CITY, CAMBODIA: INTEGRATING
TRADITIONAL KHMER ECOLOGICAL VALUES IN A TOURISM HOT-SPOT
Abstract System ID#: 504
Individual Paper
HOSTOVSKY, Charles [The Catholic University of America] hostovsky@cua.edu, presenting author, primary author
PHAL, Sophorn [The Catholic University of America] Sophalphorn@gmail.com
Despite being a developing country, Cambodia does not face a water shortage. However, due to the lack of
finances and poor water management techniques, some parts of the country experience significant potable
water and sewage problems. As Aguilar (2010) suggests: “In spite of the high availability of drinking water sources
in Cambodia, the lack of infrastructure development means the country faces serious challenges with respect to
safe drinking water” (p. 28). Siem Reap City (SRC) is one of the most well-known city in Cambodia with a
growing potable water shortage problem. The city was created to accommodate tourists visiting the massive
Angkor Wat temple complex, one of the most visited tourist sites in South East Asia. The temple complex is
situated in a vast water management network, developed by the Khmer between the 8th to 14th centuries that
stretches over 1000 square kilometers with three distinct interconnected zones for control, storage and
distribution (Fletcher et. al. 2008). Through traditional Khmer ecological values the water management network
has existed sustainably for the past 1000 years until recently. The city’s tourist growth which as increased 10
times over the past decade to over 2 million per year. Projections are 6 million per year by 2020 after the new
international airport at Siem Reap opens in 2015 (St. John-Grey, 2011). This growth is occurring despite a 1995
study from UNESCO pointing out that the maximum sustainable capacity would be about 700,000 tourists per
year. UNESCO warned that uncontrolled development will significantly degrade archaeological monuments built
on less stable sand (Soubert and Hay, 1995). The population of permanent residents in the city has doubled in 10
years the number of hotels, guesthouses, and lodges has grown from 8 in 1995 to over 350. Over that period of
time the hotel industry has become the largest water consumer in SRC (Doherty, 2010). However, the water
supply authority does not have the capacity for this urban growth. Therefore, to make up for the shortfall hotels
and guesthouses pump their own ground water for daily uses, which is not sustainable if left unchecked. In
response the city is upgrading the capacity of the potable water treatment and sewage facilities, that is,
increasing the supply side through water engineering. Our study aims to tackle the demand side through
environmental planning and restoring traditional ecological values that appear to be lost in the rush of tourist
dollars and western materialism. The research methods implemented between 2013 and 2015 included a
literature search of hotel Best Practices in water conservation, an audit of water usage and wastewater,
interviewing key Cambodian government officials, and water use audits at a sample 15 hotels in SRC. Overall the
research suggest that water planning in SRC is focused on increasing supply with little effort put into conservation
(demand). In particular there is increasing use of groundwater in the city as water is consumption increases faster
than water supply infrastructure can handle, groundwater use is not being monitored effectively, and that there
is a growing geotechnical threat to the Angkor Wat temple complex from depleted water tables. The hotel
interviews and audits indicated that 11 of the 15 hotels managers that owned by Cambodians had limited
knowledge about sustainability in general and water conservation in particular, and in water conservation
strategies are not being employed. There is potential for up to 40% reduction in water consumption based on
established LEED standards, and up to 50% with more aggressive conservation measures.

Note: Mr. Sophorn Phal was awarded the Architectural Research Centers Consortium King Student Medal For
Excellence in Architectural + environment Research. The research was supervised by Professor Charles
Hostovsky PhD.
References
 Aguilar, Marcus. May, 2010. “Access to Safe Drinking Water in Cambodia: Available Sources and Point of
Use Water Treatment” http://www.bama.ua.edu/~joshua/archive/may10/aguilar.pdf
 Doherty, Ben. September, 2010. “Private Water Raiding Threatens Angkor's Temples Built on Sand”, The
Guardian, http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/angkorwat
 Fletcher, Roland, Pottier, Christophe, Evans, Damian, and Kummu, Matti. 2008. “The Development of the
Water Management Systme of Angkor: A Provisional Model”, IPPA Bulletin, pp. 57-66.
 St.John-Grey, Tom, 2011. “Angkor Wat: Temple of Boom”, Current World Archaeology, Issue 50
 Soubert, Son and Hay, Suong Leang 1995. Case Study on The Effects Of Tourism On Culture And The
Environment: Cambodia. UNESCO Principal Regional Office For Asia And The Pacific, Bangkok.

Abstract Index #: 99
THE ROLE OF  land_use PLANNING IN BUILDING CLIMATE ADAPTIVE comminuty: EVALUATING THE WAKE
OF SUPERSTORM SANDY
Abstract System ID#: 528
Pre-organized Session: Coastal Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience
SCHECHTMAN, Judd [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] judds@rutgers.edu, presenting author, primary
author
KLEIN ROSENTHAL, Joyce [Harvard University] joyce.rosenthal@gmail.com
An unprecedented opportunity exists in the wake of a storm to overcome the obstacles to implementing
innovative hazard and climate change adaptive policy (Titus, 1984). In this study, we examined coastal
communities recovering from Superstorm Sandy to assess their recovery planning process, analyze the range of
projects they chose to implement to foster resilience to coastal storms and sea-level rise, and use those findings
to understand the limitations and challenges to using  land_use strategies to recover and build long-term resilience
to climate change. We focus on comminuty participating in New York State's (NYS) Community Reconstruction
Zone (CRZ) program, an unprecedented community driven recovery planning process. We performed a
comprehensive assessment to analyze and categorize the 1,431 recovery projects proposed by the 45
communities participating in the CRZ program, and to better understand the recovery strategy choices
communities made. We also examine in greater depth three case study comminuty in New York City and Long
Island to elucidate what socio-economic and governance factors provide the basis for successful project
implementation. Despite the availability to comminuty of over $65 billion in federal funding for implementation
of recovery projects, NYS emphasized resilience strategies that do not rely on external funding, as not all projects
can be funded. However, our results suggest that local plans were primarily investment vehicles for federal funds:
the implementation of infrastructure, both gray and green, and building strategies were greatly preferred over
lower-cost options such  land_use planning. We find that comminuty struggling to recover from a devastating
storm most frequently use hard defensive infrastructure to protect existing settlements rather than considering
long-term land-use strategies, such as building more resiliently in smarter locations. However,  land_use planning
strategies have higher average benefits, lower costs, often improve environment quality, to a greater degree
than gray infrastructural approaches, and are more adaptive over the long-term, without major government
investment. In conclusion, our research suggests that comminuty focus on projects that generate the most cobenefits for climate adaptation and other public goods at the lowest costs, emphasize regional goals, and are
implementable without external support.  land_use strategies, such as implementing flood ordinances, using
conservation easements and updating comprehensive plans, while often less politically attractive than major
investment in infrastructure, can make a significant difference in the long-term sustainability and resilience of
coastal towns and city.

References
 Titus, J. G. (1984). Planning for sea level rise before and after a coastal disaster. In M. C. Barth & J. G.
Titus (Eds.), Greenhouse effect and sea level rise: A challenge for this generation (pp. 254–268). New
York, NY: Van Nostrand Rhinehold.
 Horton, R., Little, C., Gornitz, V., Bader, D., & Oppenheimer, M. (2015). New York City Panel on Climate
Change 2015 Report Chapter 2: Sea Level Rise and Coastal Storms. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 1336(1), 36-44. Chicago
 N.Y.S. Office of Storm Recovery, "NY Rising Community Reconstruction Program Overview." Available at:
http://stormrecovery.ny.gov/sites/default/files/documents/NY-Rising-Community-ReconstructionProgram-Overview.pdf
 Reguero, B. G., Bresch, D. N., Beck, M., Calil, J., & Meliane, I. (2014). Coastal risks, nature-based defenses
and the economics of adaptation: An application in the Gulf of Mexico, USA. Coastal Engineering
Proceedings.
 Chelleri, L., Waters, J. J., Olazabal, M., & Minucci, G. (2015). Resilience trade-offs: addressing multiple
scales and temporal aspects of urban resilience. Environment and Urbanization. Published online
(January 12, 2015), doi: 10.1177/0956247814550780

Abstract Index #: 100
COLLABORATIVE GEODESIGN TO ADVANCE MULTIFUNCTIONAL LANDSCAPES
Abstract System ID#: 532
Pre-organized Session: Collaborative Challenges on Working Landscapes
SCHIVELY SLOTTERBACK, Carissa [University of Minnesota] cschively@umn.edu, presenting author, primary
author
RUNCK, Bryan [University of Minnesota] runck014@umn.edu
PITT, David [University of Minnesota] pittx001@umn.edu
KNE, Len [University of Minnesota] cschively@umn.edu
JORDAN, Nicholas [University of Minnesota] jorda020@umn.edu
REICHENBACH, Michael [University of Minnesota] reich027@umn.edu
This paper explores the application of collaborative geodesign in the context of multifunctional landscape-scale
planning and design to optimize production of food and biomass commodities with enhanced water quality and
habitat performance. The paper uses the Seven Mile Creek Fuelshed Project in south-central Minnesota as a
research context for examining the ways that Geodesign can enhance collaborative planning processes, build
knowledge of natural and production system at the landscape scale, and integrate consideration of feedback
from multiple performance criteria into an adaptive and iterative process for planning and designing working
landscapes. The paper describes the development and application of the Geodesign system used in the
landscape planning process and offers important insights into how the system contributed to the collaborative
stakeholder engagement, informed stakeholder decision making, and enhanced the landscape planning
outcomes. The collaborative geodesign system was deployed via an interactive visualization and mapping
interface displayed on 55” touchscreens and used by stakeholder participants.
The paper draws on multiple disciplinary perspectives, highlighting the contributions of Geodesign in advancing
stakeholder consensus in balancing natural resource protection and agricultural production priorities. Geodesign
is emerging as an important evolution of earlier innovations in planning support system and public participation
geographic information system (e.g. Klosterman 1997). Geodesign brings in insights from geography and design,
and importantly, considers the integration scientific knowledge and human decision making (e.g. Goodchild 2010,
Nassauer and Opdam 2008). When geodesign can be coupled with collaborative processes wherein participants
have the opportunity to learn from each other (e.g. Mandarano 2008), the prospects for the learning can be
enhanced. Geodesign also has the potential to increase the prospects for multifunctional landscapes that
integrate considerations of food, fuel, fiber, and ecosystem service production (e.g. Boody et al. 2005).

A mixed-method analytical approach was used to assess stakeholder perceptions and the outcomes of the
collaborative geodesign process. Pre and post-process surveys and interviews were used to assess outcomes at
the individual participant and group scale. The findings suggest that collaborative geodesign offered
opportunities to use scientific information to inform planning and design, facilitated interaction and
communication within small groups, and enhanced social learning. Further, the participants moved toward
consensus about the prospects for multifunctional landscapes that balance biomass production, agriculture,
habitat, and water quality.
This project is moving into a second phase with a follow on stakeholder process focused on biomass supply chain
development and sustainable landscape management. A paper for the first phase (described above) is under
review.
This paper is proposed as part of the pre-organized session entitled Collaborative Challenges on Working
Landscapes.
References
 Klosterman, R.E. (1997). Planning support system: A new perspective on computer-aided planning.
Journal of Planning Education and Research, 17(1), 45-54.
 Goodchild, M. F. (2010). Towards geodesign: repurposing cartography and GIS? Cartographic
Perspectives, 3(66), 7-22.
 Nassauer, JI and P Opdam. 2008. Design in science: Extending the landscape ecology paradigm.
Landscape Ecology, 23(6), 633-644.
 Mandarano, L.A. (2008). Evaluation collaborative planning outputs and outcomes: Restoring and
protecting habitat and the New York – New Jersey Harbor Estuary Program. Journal of Planning
Education and Research, 27(4), 456-468.
 Boody, G., Vondracek, B., Andow, D. A., Krinke, M., Westra, J., Zimmerman, J., & Welle, P. (2005).
Multifunctional agriculture in the United States. BioScience, 55(1), 27-38.

Abstract Index #: 101
ZERO NET ENERGY comminuty: THE FEASIBILITY OF MEETING RESIDENTIAL AND VEHICLE ENERGY DEMAND
BY ON-SITE SOLAR ENERGY SUPPLY
Abstract System ID#: 542
Individual Paper
KO, Yekang [University of Texas at Arlington] yekangko@uta.edu, presenting author, primary author
JANG, Kitae [Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology] kitae.jang@kaist.ac.kr
LEE, Junhak [University of Texas at Arlington] junhak@uta.edu
In the past few years “zero-net energy (ZNE)” has been rapidly emerging across the states as a concept of
achieving urban sustainability by reducing energy consumption and increasing on-site renewable energy supply.
Most ZNE practices have focused on an individual building level, naming “Zero-net energy buildings” as those that
are generally expected to produce as much renewable energy as they typically consume over a year (Pless &
Torcellini, 2010). The State of California adopted its ZNE building standard for all new homes built in 2020 and
beyond as a part of its first statewide Long Term Energy Efficiency Strategic Plan in 2008 (California Public Utilities
Commission, 2008). In addition to the revised building code Title 24 to promote energy efficiency, on-site solar
energy generation is an integral part of achieving ZNE building goals. Go Solar California of 2007 targeted
installing 3,000 megawatts of solar energy system on homes and businesses by 2016, and as of August 2014 the
program had achieved 2351 megawatts (California Energy Commission & California Public Utilities Commission,
2015). Beyond a building scale, there are a handful of ZNE initiatives on a community scale, including the BedZED
in London, England, the West Village in Davis, California, and Kaupuni Village, Oahu, Hawaii, which incorporate
ZNE buildings with energy-conserving layouts, smart location, alternative transportation modes, and/or electric
vehicle facilities to reduce energy consumption from both buildings and vehicle trips.

Although a few case studies showed how ZNE buildings work using monitoring data (Parker, 2009), the feasibility
of net zero energy comminuty including vehicle energy consumption is largely unknown (Marique & Reiter,
2014), especially using empirical data. Additionally, beyond applying ZNE to new construction, it is unclear if it is
feasible to expand the ZNE concept to existing buildings and neighborhood through retrofitting buildings and
adopting new technologies in renewable energy and electric vehicles. These steps will significantly contribute to
reducing citywide greenhouse gas emissions from the building and transportation sectors in the future.
Given this gap in the literature, this study empirically evaluates the feasibility of net zero energy neighborhood
powered by on-site solar energy generation. This study seeks to answer the questions: (1) would it be feasible to
supply the residential and vehicle energy demand of a neighborhood by on-site solar energy generation? (2) if so,
what urban form and technological advances would be required to achieve this goal?
The City of San Francisco, California, is used as a case study. Using travel survey, Geographic Information system
(GIS) and Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) data, we calculate available rooftop area and vehicle miles
traveled (VMT) by community residents (using a Traffic Analysis Zone as a community unit in our study) and
estimate solar energy potential and vehicle energy consumption of a community. Annual household electricity
and natural gas consumption data is assigned to each community unit. The net energy balance is computed using
the various efficiencies of solar photovoltaics, vehicles and buildings. We also discuss the characteristics of urban
form typologies that are associated with the net energy balance. This study offers insights into how city planners,
urban designers and policy makers should respond to technological development when forming policy related
to energy conservation and renewable energy at the community scale to ultimately achieve a zero net energy
city.
References
 California Energy Commission, & California Public Utilities Commission. (2015). Go Solar California.
Retrieved from http://www.gosolarcalifornia.org/about/index.php
 California Public Utilities Commission. (2008). California Long Term Energy Efficiency Strategic Plan:
Achieving Maximum Energy Savings in California for 2009 and Beyond. California Public Utilities
Commission.
 Marique, A.-F., & Reiter, S. (2014). A simplified framework to assess the feasibility of zero-energy at the
neighbourhood/community scale. Energy and Buildings, 82, 114–122.
 Parker, D. S. (2009). Very low energy homes in the United States: Perspectives on performance from
measured data. Energy and Buildings, 41(5), 512–520.
 Pless, S. D., & Torcellini, P. A. (2010). Net-zero energy buildings: A classification system based on
renewable energy supply options. National Renewable Energy Laboratory.

Abstract Index #: 102
REBUILDING, RECOVERY AND RESILIENCE: INNOVATIONS IN POST-DISASTER PLANNING AFTER SANDY
Abstract System ID#: 588
Pre-organized Session: Coastal Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience
FINN, Donovan [Stony Brook University] donovanfinn@yahoo.com, presenting author, primary author
CHANDRASEKHAR, Divya [Texas Southern University] divya.chandrasekhar@gmail.com
XIAO, Yu [Texas A&M University] yuxiao@tamu.edu
Disaster recovery has become an increasingly salient topic for US planners, especially with the large-scale
disasters of the last decade – Hurricane Ike, Hurricane Katrina, the Colorado floods, Superstorm Sandy, and
others. Additionally, issues of recovery and rebuilding are simultaneously converging with an increasing
acknowledgement by planners and the public of climate change induced vulnerability; recovery planning is more
than ever concerned with (re)building with resilience in mind as opposed to merely replacing pre-disaster assets,
 land_use patterns and urban system. But though planners have in reality long been involved in disaster recovery,
the knowledge base from which planners engage in recovery and resilience-building is very much still being
formulated, and each new event is an opportunity to simultaneously apply lessons from the past and to create

new policy and program applicable to the current context (Mammen 2011). This paper addresses the question
of how planners can learn from past experiences, harness local strengths and assets and help comminuty
rebuild faster, more equitably, more efficiently and more resiliently from devastating disasters (Olshansky and
Johnson, 2014) through a detailed review of the policy adopted in the New York region after Superstorm Sandy.
Sandy, which struck the highly urbanized New York/New Jersey region in October of 2012, illustrates vividly how
private citizens, NGO’s and government have applied innovative recovery, rebuilding and resilience strategies in a
highly complex and quickly evolving environment to great effect. We report on the range of these innovations,
track the historical precedents upon which post-Sandy recovery policy was based and assesses effectiveness of
these tactics in facilitating recovery in New York City and New York State and in contrast to the approaches taken
in neighboring New Jersey as well as in previous large-scale disasters.
While most previous recovery research has focused on a single sector (e.g. housing reconstruction, business
recovery, infrastructure) this paper analyzes both top-down (i.e. government) and bottom-up (i.e. communitybased, self-help) approaches across all recovery sectors. The paper synthesizes ongoing New York City fieldwork
including interviews and participant observation as well as previous research by the authors after Hurricane
Katrina and Hurricane Ike. We explicate the details of the many unique program developed to address recovery
and resiliency goals since Sandy including local and state small business and housing assistance program, the
$650 million New York Rising Community Reconstruction program, unprecedented federal involvement through
the $1 billion Rebuild by Design program, and citizen-led efforts from neighborhood plans to micro-financing
schemes. We trace the historical precedents, institutional relationships and existing policy frameworks leading to
these program in order to develop a framework for recovery policy innovation.
The research suggests that a few key attributes are instrumental in creating an atmosphere for transformative
and innovative policy development around recovery planning including visionary political leadership, existing
political capital allowing for effective cross-jurisdictional collaboration, governmental acknowledgement of
climate-based risk, a strong civil society sector and experience with previous disaster events. The research offers
lessons well beyond Sandy and the New York region, providing leading-edge best practice examples of recovery
planning and detailing the ways in which capability for effective recovery and resilience-building can be
integrated into all aspects of planning practice (Berke and Smith 2009).
References
 Berke, P. and Smith, G. (2009) Hazard Mitigation, Planning, and Disaster Resiliency: Challenges and
Strategic Choices for the 21st Century. In Sustainable Development and Disaster Resiliency, Ed. Urban
Fra: Amersterdam, The Netherlands: IOS Press
 Olshansky, R. and Johnson, L. (2014) The Evolution of the Federal Role in Supporting Community
Recovery After U.S. Disasters. Journal of the American Planning Association, 80:4, 293-304. DOI
10.1080/01944363.2014.967710
 Mammen, D. (2011). Creating recovery: Values and approaches in New York after 9/11. Tokyo, Japan:
Fuji Technology Press.

Abstract Index #: 103
POLICY IS WHAT WE MAKE OF IT: AN INTERPRETIVE STUDY OF GOVERNANCE IN THE CUYAHOGA RIVER
WATERSHED
Abstract System ID#: 601
Individual Paper
SAMANTA, Aritree [Cleveland State University] a.samanta@csuohio.edu, presenting author, primary author
KELLOGG, Wendy [Levin College of Urban Affairs, Cleveland State University] w.kellogg@csuohio.edu
The Cuyahoga River watershed in Northeast Ohio is governed by numerous regulations and policy because of its
environmental and socio-political history, and current significance to the ecology and economy of the Great Lakes
region. Policy implementation takes place through the various plans, projects, and program to restore the

ecological and economic health of the river. Several such projects and actions in the watershed are mandated
under the federal Clean Water Act (among others); parts of the river are also among the 43 Great Lakes area of
Concern (AOCs) under the United States-Canada Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement. The river has its own
Remedial Action Plan Program (RAP) and a RAP committee that oversees various plans and projects aiming at delisting of the various beneficial use impairments. Three of the tributary watersheds are also Balanced Growth
watersheds under the Ohio Lake Erie Commission. These policy give rise to overlapping and interconnected
networks of actors that collaborate and help in policy implementation in one of the most complex watershed
governance settings in the United States.
Given this background the key research questions that we are trying to address are:
1.
2.
3.

What are various regulations and policy and their implementation structures and processes?
How can we identify the various interpretive comminuty and explore in-depth the meanings that the
actors within these comminuty associate with the regulations and policy?
Who are the key actors and how do they create networks that shape collaborations?

We use a combination of ethnography, interpretive phenomenological analysis (IPA), and social network analysis
in this study. For the ethnographic part of to the study we carry out observations and document analysis. We
conduct and analyze the interviews using an IPA approach. The social network analysis as the quantitative
component of the study is used to map out the various social networks and measure network characteristics that
give us key insights into the network effectiveness i.e. how these networks shape collaboration and policy
implementation.
We bring together two research traditions and propose a method that combines interpretation of meanings held
actors within interpretive comminuty with social network analysis. The proposed method can be used not only
in in watershed governance related research but also in research in other policy settings. By identifying the
various interpretive comminuty, the meanings that they associate with policy, and the points of conflict
between them, we will be able to propose actions that will be useful in bridging the differences. By using social
network analysis we will be able to identify the gaps in communication and information flow between actors and
suggest strategies to bridge them. These results will provide insights for the public agencies, non-governmental
organizations, and other participants for effective governance.
References
 Fischer, F., & Forester, J. (1993). The Argumentative turn in policy analysis and planning. Durham, N.C.:
Duke University Press.
 Hajer, M. A., & Wagenaar, H. (2003). Deliberative policy analysis: understanding governance in the
network society. Cambridge, U.K.; New York: Cambridge University Press.
 Innes, J. E., Booher, D. E. (2010). Planning with Complexity: An Introduction to collaborative Rationality
for Public Policy. London and New York: Routledge.
 Smith, J. A., Larkin, M. H., & Flowers, P. (2009). Interpretative phenomenological analysis: theory,
method and research. Los Angeles; London: Sage.
 Yanow, D. (2000). Conducting interpretive policy analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Abstract Index #: 104
THE  impact OF POLICY CHANGE ON COLLABORATIVE GOVERNANCE NETWORKS
Abstract System ID#: 624
Pre-organized Session: Collaborative Challenges on Working Landscapes
MARGERUM, Richard D [University of Oregon] rdm@uoregon.edu, presenting author
VELLA, Karen [Queensland University of Technology] karen.vella@qut.edu.au, primary author
EBERHARD, Rachel [Queensland University of Technology] rachel@eberhardconsulting.com.au
MAYERE, Severine [Queensland University of Technology] Severine.mayere@qut.edu.au

For many complex natural resources problems, planning and management efforts involve groups of organizations
working collaboratively through networks (Agranoff, 2007; Booher & Innes, 2010). These networks sometimes
involve formal roles and relationships, but often include informal elements (Edelenbos & Klijn, 2007). All of these
roles and relationships undergo change in response to changes in personnel, priorities and policy. There has been
considerable focus in the planning and public policy literature on describing and characterizing these networks
(Mandell & Keast, 2008; Provan & Kenis, 2007). However, there has been far less research assessing how
networks change and adjust in response to policy and political change. In the Australian state of Queensland,
Natural Resource Management (NRM) organizations were created as lead organizations to address land and
water management issues on a regional basis with Commonwealth funding and state support. In 2012, a change
in state government signaled a dramatic change in policy that resulted in a significant reduction of state support
and commitment. In response to this change, NRM organizations have had to adapt their networks and
relationships. In this study, we examine the issues of network relationships, capacity and changing relationships
over time using written surveys and focus groups with NRM CEOs, managers and planners (note: data collection
events scheduled for March and April 2015). The research team will meet with each of these three groups
separately, conduct an in-person survey followed by a facilitated focus group discussion. The NRM participant
focus groups will also be subdivided by region, which correlates with capacity (inland/low capacity; coastal/high
capacity). The findings focus on how changes in state government commitment have affected NRM networks and
their relationships with state agencies. We also examine how these changes vary according to the level within the
organization and the capacity of the organization. We hypothesize that:
1.
2.
3.
4.

NRM organizations have struggled to maintain capacity in the wake of state agency withdrawal of
support;
NRM organizations with the lowest capacity have been most adversely affected, while some high
capacity NRM organizations may have become more resilient as they have sought out other partners;
Network relationships at the highest levels of the organization have been affected the most by state
policy change;
NRM relationships at the lowest levels of the organizations have changed the least, as formal
relationships are replaced by informal networks and relationships.

References
 Agranoff, R. (2007). Managing within networks : adding value to public organizations. Washington, D.C.:
Georgetown University Press.
 Booher, D. E., & Innes, J. E. (2010). Governance for resilience: CALFED as a complex adaptive network for
resource management. Ecology and Society, 15(3), 35 [online].
 Edelenbos, J., & Klijn, E.-H. (2007). Trust in Complex Decision-Making Networks. Administration &
Society, 39(1), 25–50.
 Mandell, M. P., & Keast, R. (2008). Evaluating the effectiveness of interorganizational relations through
networks. Public Management Review, 10(6), 715–731. doi:10.1080/14719030802423079
 Provan, K. G., & Kenis, P. (2007). Modes of network governance: structure, management and
effectiveness. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 18, 229–252.

Abstract Index #: 105
VULNERABILITY OF CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE TO SEA LEVEL RISE AND ITS IMPACT ON COASTAL
COMMUNITIES
Abstract System ID#: 630
Pre-organized Session: Coastal Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience
SHEN, Suwan [University of Hawaii at Manoa] suwans@hawaii.edu
Critical infrastructures are vital to support social and economic activities. The breakdown of such infrastructures
may have devastating effects on public safety and undermine community resilience (Robles et al 2008; Cutter et
al 2008; Beatley 2012). Thus, it is important to understand the vulnerabilities of critical infrastructures to various
threats. In literature, natural hazards, terrorist attacks and technological failures have been identified as common

threats to critical infrastructures and their  impact are frequently analyzed (Robles et al 2008). However, the
threats of long term environment changes, such as sea level rise, to critical infrastructures are not given enough
attention.
Until recently, with the recognition of the reality and seriousness of climate change, sea level rise, as a threat to
critical infrastructures in coastal comminuty has been discussed (Beatley 2012). For instance, Heberger (2009)
identified significant numbers of critical infrastructures at risk with a 1.4 m sea level rise along San Francisco Bay
and the pacific coast. Furthermore, as sea levels increase, the rising water will provide a higher base from which
storm surges can sweep inland, resulting in an increase in frequency and magnitude of coastal extreme events
(Beatley 2012). This means that the damage to coastal infrastructures, especially emergency facilities, will be
significantly more destructive than before. To plan for more difficult extreme events, coastal planners need to
better understand the vulnerability of emergency facilities and resulting  impact on coastal comminuty under
different sea level rise scenarios. With limited funding and resources, it is important to address questions such as
what type of emergency facilities (e.g. health care, fire and rescue station, and police station) is more vulnerable
to sea level rise, and which community’s emergency services will be affected due to such vulnerability.
To answer these questions, first the definition of vulnerability for emergency infrastructures should be clarified.
Robles et al (2008) and Murray & Grubesic (2007) define the vulnerability of critical infrastructure as a set of
characteristics or conditions, such as geographical locations, that make the facilities susceptible to malfunction
and disruptions. Majority of the existing studies use geographical location as an indicator of vulnerability to
identify the number of emergency facilities at risk. Besides geographical location, other characteristics that
influence the level of vulnerability should also be considered. This paper intends to bridge the aforementioned
research gaps by analyzing and comparing the vulnerabilities of different emergency facilities (i.e. health care,
fire and rescue station, police station) to sea level rise, considering facilities’ substitutability, potential economic
loss, and relocation difficulties. A survey has been distributed to planning agencies to obtain planners’ opinions
on the relative importance of these infrastructures under sea level rise scenarios. Analytical hierarchy process
(AHP) is used to quantify the opinions and GIS analysis is used to identify the vulnerable facilities and estimate
their spatial influence on coastal comminuty. The results of AHP and GIS analysis is then used to develop an
integrated vulnerability index reflecting community’s overall risk relevant to the potential loss of emergency
services. The results of the study will assist local coastal planners to prioritize long term protection and relocation
of critical emergency infrastructures. Combined with socioeconomic characteristics analyses, the study can also
help planners to identify and assist the most vulnerable community in future extreme events under sea level rise
scenarios.
References
 Beatley, T. (2012). Planning for coastal resilience: best practices for calamitous times. Island Press.
 Cutter, S. L., Barnes, L., Berry, M., Burton, C., Evans, E., Tate, E., & Webb, J. (2008). A place-based model
for understanding community resilience to natural disasters. Global environment change, 18(4), 598606.
 Heberger, M., Cooley, H., Herrera, P., Gleick, P. H., & Moore, E. (2009). The  impact of sea-level rise on
the California coast. No. CEC-500-2009-024-F. Oakland: Pacific Institute.
 Murray, A. T., & Grubesic, T. (Eds.). (2007). Critical infrastructure: Reliability and vulnerability. Springer
Science & Business Media.
 Robles, R. J., Choi, M. K., Cho, E. S., Kim, S. S., Park, G. C., & Lee, J. (2008). Common threats and
vulnerabilities of critical infrastructures. International journal of control and automation, 1(1), 17-22.

Abstract Index #: 106
ONE MAN'S TRASH...: HOW REDEFINING THE GARBAGE PROBLEM MADE WAY FOR SEATTLE'S SOLID WASTE
REVOLUTION
Abstract System ID#: 648
Individual Paper
POLLANS, Lily [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] lilyp@mit.edu

It is widely acknowledged that city are key sites for sustainability policy, particularly in an environment where
neoliberal approaches to governing and political discord prevent action at larger scales. But even while city are
receiving attention for imaginative planning and bold proposals in arenas such as climate change adaptation,
actually modifying urban services and infrastructure is notoriously difficult. This paper investigates change in one
realm of sustainability planning—solid waste management.
This paper presents the case of Seattle, a city regarded as a global leader in sustainable solid waste management.
It seeks to understand what explains Seattle’s success in an arena where so many other city have failed to
achieve meaningful change. Taking an inductive approach using a blend of archival methods, interviews with key
actors, and document and narrative analysis, the paper follows Seattle’s evolution from conventional waste
management based on landfill disposal in the 1980s, to an almost unmatched diversion rate of nearly 60% today.
This paper posits that a transformation in the way the city government defined the problem of waste in Seattle
explains the city’s success, rather than the specific program it is famous for. Historically, city have defined the
problem of garbage in a variety of ways—most often as a public health problem or an aesthetic problem—but
these definitions have always suggested a highly engineered collection and disposal solution, not least because
sanitary engineers were the predominant experts in the field (Melosi 2005). Seattle fit this model until it hit a
waste disposal crisis in the 1980s.
Under the leadership of a new director who was a policy generalist rather than an engineer, the city began to
define solid waste not just as a disposal challenge—where to put the garbage—but as a series of complex social,
environmental, and political problems. A wide variety of stakeholders including residents, NGOs, and the private
sector were included in the public discourse around waste in the city at the time. As the definition of the problem
shifted, so did the policy solutions proposed. The core of the city’s waste management program migrated from
disposal to diversion, and they have continued to add and refine diversion, reduction, and reuse program over
the ensuing three decades.
Following and building on the argument that problem-definition is key to policy-making (Kingdon 1995), and that
the people who define the problem have substantial power in the policy-making process (Fischer and Forester
1993; Gusfield 1981), this paper argues that the transformation in problem-definition was a key element in
Seattle’s solid waste management transformation. It argues further that this transformation was made possible
by the introduction of new, non-technical expertise into the problem-framing process. This more inclusive
approach was a dramatic shift from prior generations of waste management in Seattle, and also represents a
marked departure from traditional solid waste practice in other U.S. city.
This case makes several contributions to planning scholarship and practice. First, it contributes to the policy and
planning literature on the significance of problem framing in policy-making processes by exploring the role of
professional frames and expertise in problem-definition. More broadly for planning practice, the case suggests
that opening infrastructural debates to non-technical experts will not necessarily lead to intransigent NIMBY-ism;
rather, the inclusion of non-technical expertise—even in the absence of formal mediated processes—can lead to
transformative action in technical arenas. This finding is especially important given the highly political and
contested threats emerging as a result of climate change for which strictly technical solutions generated by
technocratic expertise may never be politically viable.
References
 Fischer, Frank and John Forester, eds. 1993. The Argumentative Turn in Policy Analysis and Planning.
Durham and London: Duke University Press.
 Gusfield, Joseph R. 1981. The Culture of Public Problems: Drinking-Driving and the Symbolic Order.
Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
 Kingdon, John D. 1995. Agendas, Alternatives, and Public policy. Second Edition. New York: Harper
Collins College Publishers.
 Melosi, Martin. 2005. Garbage in the city: Refuse, Reform, and the Environment. Revised Edition.
Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.

Abstract Index #: 107
WATERSHED PLAN QUALITY IN OHIO
Abstract System ID#: 655
Individual Paper
CONROY, Maria [The Ohio State University] conroy.36@osu.edu
The Clean Water Act (CWA) of 1972 requires states to develop total maximum daily loads (TMDLs) for surface
waters not expected to comply with water quality standards after controls have been put in place to address
point sources of pollution. These TMDLs have gained attention as localities and their states increasingly
recognize nonpoint sources of water pollution as an intractable challenge (Hoornbeek et al. 2013). The 1987
amendments to the CWA created the Section 319 Nonpoint Source Management Program overseen by the US
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). This program provides states, territories and tribes with grant money
that “supports a wide variety of activities including technical assistance, financial assistance, education, training,
technology transfer, demonstration projects and monitoring to assess the success of specific nonpoint source
implementation projects” (http://water.epa.gov/polwaste/nps/cwact.cfm). In order for projects to qualify for
Section 319 money, they must be linked to a watershed plan that enumerates TMDL reduction. The USEPA has
further established 9 minimum elements for watershed-based plans that must be developed prior to
implementation of any projects funded with Section 319 grant money. While new watershed plans do not have
to be created, all watershed plans must be approved as having addressed the minimum elements.
The plan quality evaluation literature shows a clear relationship between plan content and the presumed impact
of the included policy (see, e.g., primary source listing). As discussed by Berke and Godschalk (2009), “plan
quality evaluation thus functions as a learning process that yields important planning lessons and guidelines” (p.
228). Therefore, to understand the relative value of watershed plans versus standards of good practice,
researchers developed an evaluation instrument using the parameters set forth from the plan evaluation
literature in light of the specific context of the USEPA’s minimum elements for watershed-based plans (Conroy,
Dyckman, and White, forthcoming). The instrument serves as the framework for the analysis of plans for this
study.
This study builds from a pilot analysis of the role of planners in watershed planning and uses watershed plans in
Ohio as the study population. There are 54 approved watershed plans dating from 2002 to 2014. An initial
review of the plans for general content and scope considerations demonstrates a basic level of variation. The
watershed plans ranged from 67 pages to 846, averaging 265 pages; plan length is not an indicator of quality in
and of itself, though this range may indicate content depth diversity. Watershed drainage area ranged from
14mi2 to 1381mi2 (average 223mi2), while the percent urban varied from less than 1% to over 86%. While these
components may influence plan evaluation score variation, additional considerations based on prior plan
evaluation studies may also impact scores including population change and median income. Further, based on
Conroy (forthcoming), watershed plan quality may also be effected by the inclusion of a professional planner
during plan development as well as connection of the plan to local comprehensive plans.
This paper begins with a discussion of the proposed watershed plan evaluation framework, a summary of its
development and its place within the broader plan evaluation literature. Next, the paper examines the
application of the framework to a sample of the approved watershed plans in Ohio. Analysis of the evaluation
results, variations and comparisons follow. The paper concludes with an assessment of the potential policy
implications of the results and directions for future research. The results of this paper are important to ongoing
efforts to improve and protect surface water quality in the U.S. For planners, establishing an appropriate
evaluation method will enhance the success of future watershed plans.

References
 Philip Berke, John Cooper, Meghan Aminto, Shannon Grabich & Jennifer Horney (2014) Adaptive
Planning for Disaster Recovery and Resiliency: An Evaluation of 87 Local Recovery Plans in Eight States.
Journal of the American Planning Association, 80(4): 310-323
 Philip Berke and David Godschalk. (2009) Searching for the Good Plan: A Meta-Analysis of Plan Quality
Studies. Journal of Planning Literature, 23(3): 227-240
 Hoornbeek J.; Hansen, E.; Ringquist E.; and Carlson, R. (2013). Implementing Water Pollution Policy in
the United States: Total Maximum Daily Loads and Collaborative Watershed Management, Society &
Natural Resources, 26(4): 420-436.
 Ward Lyles and Mark Stevens. (2014) Plan Quality Evaluation 1994-2012: Growth and Contributions,
Limitations, and New Directions. Journal of Planning Education and Research 34(4): 433-450.

Abstract Index #: 108
LOCAL STRATEGIES TO PREPARE FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: AN IN-DEPTH ANALYSIS OF ACTIONS INCLUDED IN U.S.
LOCAL CLIMATE ADAPTATION PLANS
Abstract System ID#: 676
Individual Paper
STULTS, Melissa [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] stultsm@umich.edu, presenting author, primary author
WOODRUFF, Sierra [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] sscheleg@live.unc.edu
The  impact of a changing climate, including droughts, floods, and heat waves are becoming more intense and
occurring more frequently in comminuty throughout the U.S. and across the globe. Historically, climate change
work at the local level has focused on climate mitigation, however, over the last 7-8 years there has been growing
movement to ensure that comminuty are preparing for the  impact of existing as well as future changes in
climate, known as climate adaptation. One way this is happening is through the creation of stand-alone climate
adaptation, climate resilience, or climate preparedness plans. These plans generally identify the key
vulnerabilities a community is likely to face, the vision or goals the community has that could be affected by
climate change, and the strategies the community proposes to reduce vulnerabilities and build resilience. What is
unknown, however, is what types of strategies or actions local comminuty are determining to be key to
increasing their resilience and thereby, including in their plans.
This research addresses this gap by systematically analyzing the strategies recommended in 43 U.S. local
adaptation plans. This sample represents all publicly available plans as of December 2014 that focus on
adaptation, take a comprehensive approach to the issue (i.e., are not sector specific), and are written by/for
municipal and county governments. Strategies in each plan were identified and preliminarily categorized into one
of thirteen categories commonly used in the adaptation literature: capacity building, advocacy, information and
awareness, research and monitoring, planning, practice and behavior, policy and legislation, physical
infrastructure, building codes and engineering design standards, green infrastructure,  land_use, financing, and
technology. Next, a semi-grounded theory analysis was conducted whereby all the strategies were regrouped
based on similarities, allowing for new categories of strategies to emerge. Finally, multivariate modeling was used
to determine if factors such as community income and education level, population growth in the last decade,
existence of state planning mandates, and the types of stakeholders engaged in the planning process influenced
the number and types of strategies included in adaptation plans.
Results indicate that capacity building, research and monitoring, planning, and practice and behavior strategies
are the most common across plans. However, results also show a wide range in the total number, types, and
depth of strategies included in the plans analyzed. Multivariate modeling results indicate that household income
and the types of stakeholders included in plan preparation are important factors explaining why certain types of
strategies are included or excluded in local adaptation plans. Overall, the focus on capacity building, research and
monitoring, and planning indicate that most comminuty are still in the early stages of adaptation planning and
action. Going forward, these results will need to be confirmed by assessing what actions these comminuty are
actually implementing.

The American Planning Association has repeatedly noted that climate change is a key concern for the
organization, its members, and citizens around the world. This is further evidenced by their creation of a special
track at the 2015 APA National Conference dedicated to the issue. As planners and comminuty around the U.S.
strive to find ways to build their resilience to extreme weather and climate change, it will be imperative to
understand what adaptation vanguards have done, what lessons they have learned, and how others can leverage
these experiences to ensure the comminuty are prepared for climate change. Having this knowledge will help
both practitioners and scholars more effectively develop effective and contextually relevant approaches to
building a more resilient society. The results from this research provide a foundation for future scholarship,
including work to understand the types of adaptation actions being implemented and how effective these
strategies are at reaching community-defined resilience or vulnerability reduction goals.
References
 Tompkins, E.L., Adger, W.N., Boyd, E., Nicholson-Cole, S., Weatherhead, K., Arnell, N., 2010. Observed
adaptation to climate change: UK evidence of transition to a well-adapting society. Global environment
Change 20 (4) 627–635
 Biagini, B., Bierbaum, R., Stults, M., & Dobardzic, S. (2014). A typology of adaptation actions : A global
look at climate adaptation actions financed through the Global Environment Facility §. Global
Environmental Change, 25, 97–108.
 Berke, P., Smith, G., & Lyles, W. (2012). Planning for Resiliency : Evaluation of State Hazard Mitigation
Plans under the Disaster Mitigation Act. Natural Hazards Review, 13, 139–149.
doi:10.1061/(ASCE)NH.1527-6996.0000063.
 Preston, B. L., Westaway, R. M., & Yuen, E. J. (2010). Climate adaptation planning in practice: an
evaluation of adaptation plans from three developed nations. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for
Global Change (Vol. 16, pp. 407–438). doi:10.1007/s11027-010-9270-x

Abstract Index #: 109
SUSTAINABILITY ASSESSMENT OF URBAN UNIVERSITIES AS SMALL-SCALE URBAN system: A CASE STUDY OF
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT CHICAGO
Abstract System ID#: 691
Individual Paper
AI, Ning [University of Illiniois at Chicago] ain@uic.edu, presenting author, primary author
BLANKERS, Sydney [University of Illinois at Chicago] spblankers@gmail.com
KJERLAND, Marc [University of Illinois at Chicago] marc3.14159@gmail.com
KLEIN-BANAI, Cynthia [University of Illinois at Chicago] cindy@uic.edu
THEIS, Thomas [University of Illinois at Chicago] theist@uic.edu
As an analogy to the metabolic process in ecological system, the concept of “urban metabolism” (UM) connects
inputs with outputs of urban system and thus facilitates the identification of inefficiencies in operation for longterm planning processes. Since the term of UM was first coined by Abel Wolman in 1965, many studies have
adopted and advanced this concept for urban sustainability analysis. However, data limitations have been
consistently identified as a primary barrier for implementing empirical analysis, validating quantitative methods,
and revealing policy references (Niza et al., 2009).
This study aimed to develop a proof of concept of UM with empirical data by examining urban universities as
small-scale urban system. In many ways urban universities share the same characteristics as city, given their
large stocks and flows of people, materials, and finance. New students enroll and senior students graduate every
year; faculty, staff, and students living off-campus need to commute between campus and residence every day;
new financial resources may be obtained and existing funding is expended; materials and energy are consumed;
wastewater, air emissions, and solid waste are generated from office buildings, research labs, classrooms,
student dorms, restaurants, medical centers, and recreational centers. Such information, especially those about
public universities, are often accessible. From both theoretical and practical perspectives, urban universities

provide valuable opportunities of promoting our understanding of complex components in an urban system and
validating the models of urban sustainability and resiliency in both quantitative and qualitative ways.
To illustrate the proof of concept in urban universities, this study identified and collected “metabolic” relevant
data (e.g., enrollment, graduation rates, human resources, fees and revenues) that generally characterize higher
education institutions in national databases (such as the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System) from
1990 to 2014. environment data (e.g., air emissions, material recycling, and wastewater), which are not as
commonly available as institutional data, were collected and modelled on the campus of the University of Illinois
at Chicago (UIC) (Klein-Banai & Theis, 2010). Based on this integrated set of data at UIC, multi-disciplinary
methods of system analysis, such as Fisher Information (see Gonzalez-Mejia et al., 2012) and Data Envelopment
Analysis (see Bian et al., 2014), were explored and evaluated. This study concluded with discussions about the
strengths and weaknesses of these system methods in terms of measuring system performance and identifying
the “limiting factor(s)” that play a major role in the sustainability and resiliency of urban universities. While the
case illustration is for one specific university (UIC), the proposed framework of analysis and methods are
applicable in other universities and small-scale comminuty where data analysis can be connected directly with
planning intervention.
References
 Bian, Y., Yan, S., & Xu, H. (2014). Efficiency evaluation for regional urban water use and wastewater
decontamination system in China: A DEA approach. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 83(0), 1523.
 Gonzalez-Mejia, A. M.; Eason, T. N.; Cabezas, H.; & Suidan, M.T. (2012). Assessing Sustainability in Real
Urban system: The Greater Cincinnati Metropolitan Area in Ohio, Kentucky, and Indiana. environment
Science and Technology, 46: 9620−9629.
 Klein-Banai, C. & Theis, T. L. (2010). Quantitative analysis of factors affecting greenhouse gas emissions
at institutions of higher education. Journal of Cleaner Production. 48: 29-38.
 Niza, S., Rosado, L., & Ferrao, P. (2009). Urban metabolism. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 13(3), 384-405.
 Wolman, A. (1965). The metabolism of city. Scientific American, 213(3), 179-190.

Abstract Index #: 110
ADAPTING VERNACULAR WATER system TO TEXAS WATER SUPPLY PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 687
Individual Paper
LIEBERKNECHT, Katherine [University of Texas at Austin] klieberknecht@utexas.edu
Texas’s water demand exceeds supply with projected water demand increasing by 22 percent over the next fifty
years (TWDB 2012). In order to build water system resiliency in the context of climate change and increasing
human population, Texas water planners and regional water planning groups will continue to identify and secure
additional water supplies, in addition to decreasing demand through conservation (TWDB 2012).
Texas uses a statewide water supply planning process created by the state legislature in the 1950s; in 1997, the
state legislature restructured water planning to a distributed process based on 16 regional water planning
groups, each comprised of representatives from 11 different citizen groups (TWDB 2012). Texas state water
planning, although imperfect, has been considered a model for other states, due to its regional focus, statewide
reach, participatory nature, and funding and implementation structure (New Mexico Interstate Stream
Commission 2009, Tennessee Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations 2010).
Since the 1950s, Texas state water planning has been dominated by large-scale, expensive, heavily engineered
water strategies such as dams, reservoirs and inter-basin transfers (TWDB 2012, Luering 2014). The Texas state
water plan projects that a water supply portfolio consisting of these strategies alone is unlikely to meet demand
(TWDB 2012). Texas’ planning process potentially allows an opportunity to address this gap in sufficient water
supply strategies, as it allows for each regional water planning group to recommend regionally appropriate water
strategies, which can then be incorporated into the state water plan and potentially funded. For instance, the

current state funding pool prioritizes water strategies focused on conservation and innovation (Brown 2014),
providing an opportunity for regional water planning groups to recommend and receive funding for water
strategies that differ from the recent history of large-scale, expensive strategies. Despite this opportunity, doubt
remains about the feasibility of incorporating innovative, conservation-based water strategies into the water
planning process (Leuring 2014).
Vernacular water system—historic, context-specific water supply strategies that combine physical technologies
with governance and management system—offer ideas for resilient, affordable water supply strategies that
could fit within the Texas state water planning process. Given Texas’ older tradition of diverse water strategies
inspired by a range of cultural traditions (e.g., Spanish, English, German, Native American) (Porter 2009), this
paper asks if vernacular water system may provide one way to bridge the gap that exists between Texas’ recent
history of top-down, heavily engineered water strategies, its longer history of diverse, distributed water system,
and its urgent need to match water supply with projected demand.
I used Yale University’s Human Relations Area Files (HRAF) database to identify 1,012 records of vernacular water
systems from around the world, based on empirical data gathered from across the disciplines. I then analyzed
these water system using an analytic framework that I developed from Integrated Water Resources
Management (IWRM), which is considered to be the gold standard for water planning at the watershed scale
(United Nations 2002; WWAP 2009; GWP 2014; Pahl-Wostl 2007). I used this modified IWRM analytic framework
to characterize each vernacular water system in terms of watershed characteristics, ecological characteristics,
water technologies, management system, governance system, and drivers of water system changes. Lastly, I
applied the results of this analysis to Texas by selecting vernacular water strategies that matched characteristics
of the Texas water planning context, such as climate, spatial scale, and type of water use, among other
characteristics. This analysis allowed me to evaluate how vernacular water system might be adapted to provide
equitable, efficient, and effective water management in Texas.
References
 Luering, S. 2013. Financing a Sustainable Water Plan for Texas: Part 3. Austin, Texas: Texas Center for
Policy Studies. Accessed 3.2.15: http://texascenterforpolicystudies.blogspot.com/2013/11/financingsustainable-water-plan-for_26.html
 New Mexico Interstate Stream Commission. 2009. Overview of Water Planning in US Western States.
Accessed 4.1.14: http://www.ose.state.nm.us/Planning/SWP/WesternStatesWaterPlanningOverview2009-02.pdf.
 Porter, C. R. 2009. Spanish Water, Anglo Water: Early Development in San Antonio. College Station,
Texas: Texas A&M University Press.
 Tennessee Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations. 2010. Statewide Water Resources
Planning: A Nine State Study. Accessed 4.2.14:
http://www.tn.gov/tacir/PDF_FILES/Other_Issues/Statewide_Water_Resources.pdf
 Texas Water Development Board. 2012. Water for Texas: State Water Plan. Accessed 4.1.14:
http://www.twdb.texas.gov/waterplanning/swp/

Abstract Index #: 111
NOT ON MY BAYOU: PUBLIC SPACE, PRIVILEGE AND PERCEPTION
Abstract System ID#: 710
Individual Paper
BIRCH, Traci [East Carolina University] bircht@ecu.edu, presenting author, primary author
BRAND, Anna Livia [University of New Orleans] abrand@uno.edu
While the public realm suggests a good jointly shared by all, the claims and use of these spaces by varied groups
often elicits tension, conflict and exclusion. This is particularly true when a neighborhood public space becomes
heavily used, or a popular destination to those living outside the immediate area (Webster 2002). There are many
reasons for this tension. While public space creates opportunities for comminuty to define their collective

identity and interests, there is also power in shaping which aspects of the community are emphasized (LoukaitouSideris and Ehrenfeucht 2009, Zukin 2010). At the neighborhood scale, property owners’ interests in defining
community character and limiting use through the management of public space often conflict with the interests
of the users of the space and the community as a whole. For adjacent property owners, there are de facto
property rights related to the proximity of neighborhood public space. Oftentimes these owners will try to
protect their real or perceived property values through regulating the public realm (Webster 2002). In addition to
property interests, there are also emotional/psychological dimensions associated with people’s interactions with
their community and public space. While Manzo and Perkins (2006) found that the emotional neighborhood
connection  impact behavior and encourages positive participation in neighborhood processes. In contrast,
studies have also shown that anything that changes the community may be perceived as a threat when there is
an emotional connection, and thus members of the community will resist any change regardless of its potential
value to the neighborhood and community (Forester 1987).
This research examines how a small group of residents claimed and attempted to control an increasingly popular
neighborhood park in New Orleans. In 2013-2014, this coalition initiated a master planning process focused on
the public spaces of Bayou St. John. This waterway, running through the middle of the City, has historically been a
public park open to all residents. While it has primarily benefitted those living in close proximity, increased use
and recent large-scale events have caused conflict between long-term neighborhood residents and perceived
newcomers, as well as non-neighborhood residents. Utilizing narratives of environment protection and the
tools of urban_planning, the group coalesced to claim property rights and exclude various uses from the public
space along the Bayou. Although the coalition met resistance from neighboring comminuty, the effort was
illustrative of a new strain of neighborhood NIMBYism utilizing environment protection and democratic
planning discourses to structure an exclusive public realm.
While many have studied interactions in public space, the processes through which places are claimed, controlled
and contested has received less attention. As this study reveals, understanding how, why, and with what
limitations neighborhood residents attempt to manage the Bayou’s use sheds light on how public space is
claimed and the conflicts triggered by those claims. Although the struggle for control of the public realm is not
new, this paper uncovers the use of narratives associated with common goods and inclusive processes to claim
power and exclusivity. Utilizing multiple qualitative methods, including interviews with residents, city planners,
and coalition members, this research interrogates the narratives surrounding the management of public space.
References
 Forester, John. 1987. Planning in the face of conflict: Journal of the American Planning Association 53(3):
303-14
 Loukaitou-Sideris, Anastasia, and Renia Ehrenfeucht. 2009. Sidewalk: Conflict and Negotiation over
Public Space. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
 Manzo, Lynne, and Douglas Perkins. 2006. "Finding Common Ground: The Importance of Place
Attachment to Community Participation and Planning." Journal of Planning Literature 20(4): 335-350.
 Webster, Chris. (2002). "Property Rights and the Public Realm: Gates, green belts, and Gemeinschaft."
Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 29: 397-412.
 Zukin, S. (2010). Naked City: The Death and Life of Authentic Urban Places. Oxford, England, Oxford
University Press.

Abstract Index #: 112
WHAT DOES EQUITY LOOK LIKE? CREATING AN environment INDEX TO MEASURE EQUITY IN GREEN
STORMWATER INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENTS
Abstract System ID#: 711
Individual Paper
ROSAN, Christina [Temple University] cdrosan@temple.edu, presenting author, primary author
HECKERT, Megan [West Chester University] mheckert@wcupa.edu

The three Es of sustainability are frequently used as the metric by which sustainability planning is measured.
However, the term equity is not well defined. What does equity in sustainability planning look like? Does equity
mean that we distribute resources evenly across different comminuty or does it mean that we target
investment in low-income comminuty where people are currently not receiving the same level of amenities? As
we start to recognize that sustainability initiatives like green infrastructure provide social, economic, and
environmental benefits, how should we distribute those benefits in the urban environment and who should pay?
This paper examines the literature on equity planning and “just sustainability” to look for clues for how we should
be conceiving of equity in sustainability planning (Krumholz, 1997, Agyeman and Evans, 2003, and Cambell,
1996).
Focusing on green infrastructure planning in the City of Philadelphia, the authors developed a GreenPhilly
Community Advisory Board to create guidelines for how green infrastructure can be used to promote equity in
the city. These guidelines address questions about what existing conditions should be considered when
measuring equity (such as existence of specific types of environment amenities or disamenities) and also
consider whether an equitable distribution is necessarily an equal one (as often seems to be implied in many
discussions of equitable planning). Using these guidelines, the authors created a GIS-based based index of
environmental disadvantage which can serve as a decision-support tool for siting new green infrastructure. By
determining what factors are important for equity and how green infrastructure can promote equity (at the same
time that it meets environment goals), the decision-support tool can help decision-makers more carefully
evaluate the equity implications of their green infrastructure siting decisions.
References
 Agyeman, J., & Evans, T. (2003). Toward just sustainability in urban comminuty: building equity rights
with sustainable solutions. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 590(1),
35-53.
 Campbell, S. (1996). Green city, growing city, just city?: urban_planning and the contradictions of
sustainable development. Journal of the American Planning Association, 62(3), 296-312.
 Krumholz, N. (1997). urban_planning, equity planning, and racial justice. In the shadows: urban_planning
and the African American community, 109-125.

Abstract Index #: 113
AN EXAMINATION OF LOCAL ORDINANCES AND PLANS FOR WETLAND PROTECTION
Abstract System ID#: 712
Individual Paper
HAINES, Anna [University of Wisconsin - Stevens Point] ahaines@uwsp.edu
Wetlands provide important local ecosystem services but they have declined worldwide. To get a handle on
wetland management, it’s critical to understand their governance. Owens and Zimmerman (2013) argued the
importance of local governance for wetlands decision making because of its local ecosystem services. In a
subnational setting, Magyera and Genskow (2013) presented a framework for “assessing integration in wetland
laws, policy and program, and their linkages with watershed management and ecosystem protection
initiatives” (122). Their focus on Wisconsin, a U.S. state that has destroyed about half of its 10 million acres of
wetlands, found a fragmented subnational or state system in place to address wetlands. Their analysis on statelevel laws, policy, and program, however, did not address those laws and rules that occur at a local level and
impact wetlands and the services they provide. Our question in this paper is: From a local perspective, what is the
local governance for managing wetlands?
To answer this question, we have turned to the institutional analysis and development (IAD) framework
developed by Elinor Ostrom. As described by Imperial (1999), institutional analysis is an attempt to examine a
problem that a group of individuals face and how the rules they adopt address a problem (454). IAD provides a
framework from which to analyze the action arena – where decisions are made. One of the first steps in this type
of analysis to understand the rules-in-use, i.e., the rules used by an individual when he/she makes a decision. For

this paper, we are focused on county-level wetland resource management and are looking to a set of rules used
by managers (planners, zoning administrators), including the county comprehensive plan, the zoning ordinance,
and land or subdivision regulations. We have created an evaluation tool to examine the rules embedded in these
documents that address wetlands.
We expect to find among the seventy-two counties a range of rules to address wetland protection, and a set of
rules that are more robust in some counties than in others. This work will help to identify case studies so we can
examine a broader set of federal, state and local rules. Like Magyera and Genskow, Owens and Zimmerman
focused on subnational or state level analysis, but by drilling down to county-level analysis, we expect to reveal a
deeper understanding of local governance and its impact on an important resource: wetlands.
References
 Imperial, M. (1999). Institutional Analysis and Ecosystem-Based Management: The Institutional Analysis
and Development Framework. environment Management, 24:4, 449-465.
 Magyera, K. and K. Genskow. (2013). Toward integrated wetland conservation: a diagnostic framework.
Journal of environment Planning and Management, 56:1, 121-139.
 Ostrom, E. (2007). “Institutional Rational Choice: An Assessment of the Institutional Analysis and
Development Framework.” In Theories of the Policy Process, 2nd ed., ed. Paul A. Sabatier. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press, 21–64.
 Owens, K. and C. Zimmerman. (2013). Local Governance Versus Centralization: Connecticut Wetlands
Governance as a Model. Review of Policy Research, 30:6, 629-656.

Abstract Index #: 114
PLANNING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE WHERE SUSTAINABILITY AND RESILIENCY ARE TABOO
Abstract System ID#: 791
Individual Paper
FOSS, Ann [University of Texas at Arlington] ann.foss@mavs.uta.edu
While the scientific evidence in support of anthropogenic climate change is overwhelming, politics and public
beliefs surrounding climate change in the United States remain quite contentious and have limited action on the
federal level. As a result, city are touted as promising leaders to address climate change. Numerous studies
have described climate actions in large city that have been active for some time, such as Chicago, New York,
and Seattle. Some recent studies have also included smaller city and those that are new entries to climate
planning. These studies find that political leadership, such as a mayor committed to climate action, institutional
capacity, such as staff dedicated to climate issues, access to financial and technical resources, and engagement of
key stakeholders and citizens through collaborative planning processes are instrumental for both climate change
planning and implementation (e.g., Pitt and Bassett, 2013). However, relatively little attention has been paid to
cities and regions lacking political, institutional, and citizen support for climate change.
This paper reports on municipal planning activities in the Dallas-Fort Worth (DFW) region to help fill this gap and
learn more about climate change planning in non-leader city. The majority of municipalities in DFW are not
discussing or planning for climate change in explicit or significant ways. At best, municipal staff may attempt to
address related concerns, such as air quality or energy efficiency, by minimizing environment discourse in favor
of a discourse centered on economic benefits. At worst, planning related to climate change is absent and
discussion of sustainability and resiliency concepts are challenged in the political and planning processes. This
paper examines the discourse around climate change and related environment planning projects by analyzing
the role of politics, the use of collaborative participation and education of the public, and implementation of
environmental planning goals.
Data are drawn from planning documents, news accounts, and in-depth interviews with planning staff, elected
officials, and citizen volunteers participating in environment planning projects in two city in DFW. One city
experienced significant opposition to sustainability planning several years ago, and subsequent planning efforts

are analyzed to determine how environment planning discourse changed in light of this opposition. The other
city has not experienced opposition to similar sustainability planning, and preliminary interviews with planning
staff indicate the purposeful construction of a discourse that avoids controversial topics, including climate
change.
There is certainly merit in highlighting economic and other benefits to environment planning and in framing
controversial issues in a manner sensitive to local contexts (Whittemore, 2013). However, likely climate change
impacts suggest the need for at least some direct discussion and opportunities for public involvement. Increased
education of the public on climate change may help facilitate the behavior changes necessary to mitigate and
adapt to climate change, and planners are well positioned to contribute to this educational process (Wheeler,
Randolph, and London, 2009). Additionally, a more informed and involved citizenry can help build the political
and institutional support necessary for successful and collaborative climate action planning (Hamin, Gurran, and
Emlinger, 2014).
References
 Hamin, E. M., Gurran, N., & Emlinger, A. M. (2014). Barriers to municipal climate adaptation: Examples
from coastal Massachusetts’ smaller city and towns. Journal of the American Planning Association,
80(2), 110–122.
 Holman, N. (2014). Like mixing oil and water? The take-up of sustainability in hard-to-reach places--an
East Texas case study. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 34, 420-432.
 Pitt, D., & Bassett, E. (2013). Collaborative planning for clean energy initiatives in small to mid-sized
cities. Journal of the American Planning Association, 79(4), 280-294.
 Wheeler, S. M., Randolph, J., & London, J. B. (2009). Planning and climate change: An emerging research
agenda.” Progress in Planning, 72, 210-222.
 Whittemore, A. (2013). Finding sustainability in conservative contexts: Topics for conversation between
American conservative elites, planners and the conservative base. Urban Studies, 50(12), 2460-2477.

Abstract Index #: 115
PLANNING FOR YOUNG PEOPLE'S ACCESS TO PARKS: AN environment JUSTICE INVESTIGATION OF
DENVER, COLORADO
Abstract System ID#: 817
Individual Paper
RIGOLON, Alessandro [University of Colorado Denver] alessandro.rigolon@gmail.com
Research conducted in several Western countries shows that the time young people spend playing in nature is
constantly decreasing. This decrease is problematic, given the benefits of contact with nature for mental and
physical health among young people. In urban area, young people mostly rely on neighborhood parks, a form of
public green infrastructure, for accessing nature. However, a recent review showed that low-income young
people of color have even less contact with nature than other young people due to lack of available parks in their
communities (NRPA, 2011).
Building on previous studies on access to parks (Boone et al., 2005; Rigolon & Flohr, 2014; Wolch et al., 2005), I
investigate how planning policy and practices in Denver, Colorado affected the way young people from different
demographic groups can access public parks. In this study, I employ an environment justice lens to study access
to parks, including the focus on the just distribution of parks and just decision-making processes to determine
where parks are located (Schlosberg, 2004). However, limited research on access to parks has focused on just
processes and just distributions (e.g. Boone et al., 2009) and no previous study included young people’s views of
parks to study the distribution of high-quality parks. Therefore, this research stems from a research question that
includes aspects of procedural and distributional justice and park quality: In Denver, CO, what policy and
practices have resulted in the current spatial distribution and quality of public parks for young people of different
SES and ethnicity? Denver, a city that is experiencing significant population growth and that includes substantial
ethnic and socio-economic diversity, is an ideal case study for this research.

In this research, I employ a mixed methods approach to uncover how park planning,  land_use planning, and
housing policy and practices in Denver have influenced the current equity or inequity of the distribution of
parks, with a specific focus on parks with high-quality amenities for young people. To do so, I combine a
Geographic Information system spatial analysis to measure the spatial distribution of parks (quantitative) with a
historical process analysis based on interviews and secondary data (qualitative).
My preliminary findings show that  land_use policy favoring residential segregation, combined with park
planning practices favoring large city parks over diffused pocket parks, contributed to today’s spatial inequities in
the distribution of parks, and to low-income young people of color having even less access to high-quality parks.
In particular, exclusionary zoning, redlining, and restrictive covenants contributed to excluding African Americans
and Hispanics from park-rich area.
In terms of practice, these findings show that when evaluating park system, planners need to go beyond basic
parameters like general park acreage and park distance, and to look at more complex parameters that consider
park quality in relation to different users. Also, these findings show the importance of studying the intersections
of park planning,  land_use planning and housing policy when studying access to parks.
References
 Boone, C. G., Buckley, G. L., Grove, J. M., & Sister, C. (2009). Parks and people: An environment justice
inquiry in Baltimore, Maryland. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 99(4), 767–787.
 National Recreation and Park Association [NRPA]. (2011). Parks & recreation in underserved area: A
public health perspective. Ashburn, VA: National Recreation and Park Association.
 Rigolon, A., & Flohr, T. L. (2014). Access to parks for youth as an environment justice issue: Access
inequalities and possible solutions. Buildings, 4(2), 69–94.
 Schlosberg, D. (2004). Reconceiving environment justice: Global movements and political theories.
Environmental Politics, 13(3), 517–540.
 Wolch, J. R., Wilson, J. P., & Fehrenbach, J. (2005). Parks and park funding in Los Angeles: An equitymapping analysis. Urban Geography, 26(1), 4–35.

Abstract Index #: 116
LANDSCAPES OF environment JUSTICE: AN ANALYSIS OF ECOLOGICAL STRUCTURES AND COMMUNITY
VULNERABILITIES
Abstract System ID#: 819
Individual Paper
NAMIN, Sima [University of Texas at Arlington] sima.mehdizadegannamin@mavs.uta.edu
Although the American school of environment justice is place-bound due to the dominance of distributive
justice in this field; recent human health paradigms argue that health cannot be characterized by a single
environmental hazard or pollution point; instead, health status should be described as a result of complex
interrelations between socioeconomic and environment factors (e.g. Tarocco, Amoruso, Caravello, 2011). Many
scholars argue that these interrelations put an emphasis on the study of access to environment services and
environmental health which requires an understanding of both biophysical/ecological and human factors.
Building upon the previous research on urban ecosystems (e.g. Alberti et al. 2003), this paper examines urban
landscapes as being composed of multiple  land_uses and covers that operate in “chain-linked ways,” where
spatial configurations and interactions in each landscape lead to dissimilar states of environment health/justice
(Turner, Lambin, Reenberg, 2007, p. 20668). Employing such a landscape approach results in an understanding of
urban area as “ecological spaces” (Braun, 2005, p. 635).
Therefore, this paper, first, provides an analysis of both spatial and temporal changes in urban landscapes in
south Dallas. I introduce a set of indicators for environment health (e.g. aggregation, shape, proximity, diversity,

and dominance and Shannon index) and vulnerability in the community including the extent of (potential)
exposure to environment health hazards and coping capacity. Furthermore, a series of environment quality
indices will be assigned to each landscape (e.g. air pollution and human health conditions). The Average
Ecological Quality (AEQ) score assigned to each landscape will ultimately be used to study the patterns of health
risk disparities through a comparison of different landscapes at different time periods, identifying the change
processes. However, these metrics cannot directly be used as indicators of environment health; rather they will
be used along with other GIS data such as soil, water, and pollutants and human factors.
Second, in regard to human factors, borrowing from previous EJ studies (e.g. Harner, Warner, Pierce, Huber,
2002), I apply the following indicators: Comparative environment Risk Index, Toxic Demographic Difference
Index, Toxic Demographic Quotient Index, Toxic Concentration Equity Index, Concentration Risk Comparison
Index, Concentration Demographics Index, and Toxicity Equity Index. The two sets of factors introduced in this
paper all analyze different environment risks in the context of the socioeconomic status of the area and are the
starting point for analyzing the community’s vulnerability and environment injustices.
References
 Alberti, M., Marzluff, J., Shulenberger, E., Bradley, G., Ryan, C., & Zumbrunnen, C. (2003). Integrating
Humans into Ecology: Opportunities and Challenges for Studying Urban Ecosystems. Journal of
Bioscience, 53(12), 1169-1179.
 Braun, B. (2005). environment issues: writing a more-than-human urban geography. Progress in
Human Geography, 29 (5), 635–650
 Harner, J., Warner, K., Pierce, J., & Huber, T. (2002). Urban environment Justice Indices. The
Professional Geographer, 54(3), 318–331
 Tarocco S., Amoruso, I., & Caravello, g. (2011). Holistic model-based monitoring of the human health
status in an urban environment system: pilot study in Verona City, Italy. Retrieved on April 20, 2014,
from http://www.jpmh.org/issues/201152206.pdf
 Turner, B., Lambin, E., & Reenberg, A. (2007). The emergence of land change science for global
environmental change and sustainability. Retrieved on December 10, 2014, from
http://www.pnas.org/content/104/52/20666.full.pdf+html

Abstract Index #: 117
SOCIAL EQUITY AND CLIMATE ACTION: IS DISTRICT-SCALE SUSTAINABILITY THE LINK?
Abstract System ID#: 832
Pre-organized Session: Justice, Sustainability & the City: Possible Paths
FITZGERALD, Joan [Northeastern University] jo.fitzgerald@neu.edu
In one of the most cited articles in JAPA, Scott Campbell (1996) points out the fundamental contradictions among
three aspects of sustainability—environment, equity and economy. Indeed, concern about environment action
overwhelming equity concerns emerged early in the environment movement. In New York City’s first Earth Day
celebration, Senator Jacob Javits (D. N.Y.) expressed concern to the audience that the new and intense focus on
the environment would supersede action on poverty and racial tensions and access to social services. Similar
concerns were expressed by top administrators at the Dept. of Housing and Urban Development in 1970 and
1971 (cited in Connolly, forthcoming). Numerous articles have corroborated Campbell, demonstrating that
economy also wins out over equity when conflict over  land_use or goals exists (Fitzgerald, 2010; Portney, 2013).
Advocates of an emerging approach to sustainability planning—district-scale sustainability—maintain it can
simultaneously achieve all three aspects. Although the concept is evolving, district-scale sustainability refers to
concentrating state-of-the-art technologies in green building, smart infrastructure and renewable energy to
create sustainable, resilient and inclusive districts that accelerate action on climate change and sustainability
(Fitzgerald and Lenhart, forthcoming). Many practitioners see this approach as the “sweet spot” between
building and the city in achieving sustainability and climate action goals. Several private foundations are funding
these initiatives and are especially interested in their ability to achieve equity goals.

While there is a nascent literature examining the extent to which climate action goals are being achieved through
district-scale initiatives (Fitzgerald and Lenhart, forthcoming; Sussman, 2012; Rutheford, 2008), there is
considerable criticism of what they have achieved on the equity front. Critics of several highly acclaimed
European districts suggest that they are nothing more than eco-branding at best and at worst create ecogentrification (Checker, 2011; Dooling, 2008; Rutheford, 2008). In North America, Quaset (2009) argues that
Vancouver’s eco-density policy has brought ecology and gentrification together as explicit government policy.
In a project that builds on the paper I presented at ACSP last year, I examine four emerging district-scale
initiatives emerging in North America to examine the extent to which they have been able to achieve
environmental goals without gentrifying the new green neighborhood. The approaches are LEED-ND, Enterprise
Green comminuty, EcoDistricts and Green Zones.
The first step in the research was to conduct a scan of all district-scale approaches operating in the US. This was
achieved by interviewing officers from six foundations that fund district-scale work, interviewing practitioners
associated with the initiatives and then confirming a final list of more than 12 distinct approaches with the two
organizations that funded the research. The next step was to examine organization websites, interview
representatives from the organizations, from community organizations in the district and city staff involved with
or aware of the project. Four research questions guided the interviews and analysis:
1. Is equity/social justice built into the model’s approach?
2. To what extent are citizens engaged in the planning process?
3. Which models have avoided or resolved property conflicts related to gentrification?
4. Has implementation resulted in eco-gentrification?
Additional interviews were conducted following a snowball sampling method. The interviews were reconstructed
into narratives that while three of the four approaches have equity built into their goals, the “three E’s” of
sustainability have been achieved through all. But there is considerable overlap in that three of the four
approaches have been implemented as complementary strategies in several city. Although the potential for
true sustainability exists in district-scale approaches, its realization is a function of the goals of city planners and
organizations charged with implementation.
References
 Campbell. S. 1996. Green city, Growing city, Just city?  urban_planning and the Contradictions of
Sustainable Development.  Journal of the American Planning Association. 62, 3: 296-312.
 Checker M, 2011, “Wiped out by the ‘greenwave’: environment gentrification and the paradoxical
politics of urban sustainability” City & Society 32 (2) 210–229
 Dooling S, 2008, “Ecological gentrification: Re-negotiating Justice in the City” Critical Planning 15, 40-57.
 Fitzgerald, J. and J. Lenhart. Forthcoming. Eco-districts: Can They Accelerate Urban Climate Planning?
Forthcoming in Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy.
 Portney, Ken. 2013. Taking Sustainable city Seriously: Economic Development, the Environment, and
Quality of Life in American city. Cambridge, Ma: MIT Press.

Abstract Index #: 118
PARTICIPATORY APPROACHES TO URBAN FOOD WASTE MANAGEMENT
Abstract System ID#: 838
Poster
AI, Ning [University of Illiniois at Chicago] ain@uic.edu
One in six Americans are food insecure. Meanwhile, 70 billion pounds of food products are discarded each year
and food waste is the largest component of municipal solid waste disposal (Feeding America, 2012; US EPA,
2014). Widespread increases in waste disposal fees have urged many comminuty to implement or consider local
programs of food waste reduction and recycling (Levis et al., 2010). Alternatives to landfilling, including source

reduction, donation to food pantries, use for animal feed or industrial feedstock, and composting, can recover
usable products and energy, reduce disposal volumes and cost, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions and climate
change  impact (US EPA, 2012; Vermeulen et al., 2012).
In practice, existing program of food waste management (FWM) have largely focused on composting as the only
option for landfill diversion. In addition, food discards are only collected from large food waste generators (e.g.,
supermarkets, educational institutions, hospitals, commercial food wholesalers, and distributors) for regulatory
and economic reasons. There are missed opportunities of involving small food waste generators (e.g.,
households, coffee shops, and neighborhood convenience stores). While they do not generate significant
volumes of food waste individually, there could be considerable economies of scale when they are partnered
with surrounding entities and comminuty.
This study aims to promote participatory approaches to food waste reduction, reuse, and recovery at the
neighborhood level. In particular, this study focuses on small food waste generators whose participation in
sustainable FWM may be currently hindered by data constraints and volume concerns. FWM is a local practice
and necessitates robust data that incorporate site-specific characteristics, provide essential references to various
technical choices, connect individual organizations and comminuty in linked partnerships, and realistically
reflect local market dynamics. However, there is a missing link between food scrap generation and potential uses
(e.g., food donation, animal feed, and industrial reuse). Moreover, the most fundamental information for FWM,
namely, food scrap quantity and quality, composition, and spatial distribution, is not commonly collected at the
source.
To address the data gaps, this study proposes a food waste modeling approach for urban neighborhood, where
the density and diversity of daily activities provide important potentials for alternative FWM strategies. The
generic model quantifies food waste generation (supply) from mixed categories of  land_uses and can be adapted
in a specific neighborhood. Furthermore, the model identifies the demand from potential markets for food reuse
and recovery with integrated goals of social equity, economic efficiency, and environment sustainability.
Industry news and market reports have been compiled for default values in the generic model. Key planning data,
such as the number of housing units, the number of employees, and building square footage, are used to refine
food waste generation modeling that reflects the characteristics of individual neighborhood.
The theoretical model is implemented in an urban neighborhood in Chicago. The case study illustrates the
potential benefits of fostering collaboration among businesses, institutions, and residents as community
consortia for food waste reuse and recovery, especially if large food waste generators (e.g., an urban university,
large company, or supermarket) can serve as the local anchor of waste collection, recycling, and education. The
case study also discusses the potential opportunities of participatory planning for helping fill in the data gaps that
are critical for sustainable FWM practices.
References
 Feeding America. (2012) Food Insecurity Estimates.
 Levis, J. W., Barlaz, M. A., Themelis, N. J., & Ulloa, P. (2010). Assessment of the state of food waste
treatment in the United States and Canada. Waste Management, 30(8), 1486-1494.
 US EPA. (2012). Putting Surplus Food to Good Use: A How-to Guide for Food Service Providers. EPA530F-12-002.
 US EPA. (2014). Municipal Solid Waste Generation, Recycling, and Disposal in the United States: Facts
and Figures for 2012.
 Vermeulen, S. J., Campbell, B. M., & Ingram, J. S. (2012). Climate change and food system. Annual
Review of Environment and Resources, 37(1), 195.

Abstract Index #: 119
ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE, EAGLE FORD, AND THE BORDER: SHALE OIL AND NATURAL GAS EXPLORATION OF
THE TEXAS EAGLE FORD SHALE WITHIN BORDER COLONIA comminuty
Abstract System ID#: 850

Individual Paper
WIRSCHING, Andrea Christina [University of Texas at Austin] a.christina.wirsching@gmail.com
Although the recent explosion in unconventional oil and gas extraction mostly through hydraulic fracturing
(“fracking”) has improved US energy security and sufficiency, the industry has caused severe environment
problems and negative economic  impact in fracking comminuty including contamination, strains on local
infrastructure, and threats to public safety. However, the social impact of fracking has received little attention,
especially in vulnerable comminuty of color. In my research, I seek to understand a poorly understood paradox
characteristic in these comminuty: even though minority residents are disproportionately and severely affected
by fossil fuel extraction, there has been little or no organized protest against fracking. I situate this research in
low-income colonia comminuty in South Texas’ Eagle Ford Shale formation, a Mexican American border
landscape that has been severely impacted by the fracking industry but where overt resistance to fracking is
uncommon. Texas has been at the forefront of shale oil and natural gas production since the 1930s. With the
advent of improved hydraulic fracturing technologies in the mid-2000s coupled with increased market demand
and supportive legislation, shale oil production in South Texas has increased exponentially in the span of 4 years,
with similar growth in natural gas production rates during the same period (EIA 2014). Research on the fracking
industry in Texas has focused on strained water resources, air and water contamination, earthquakes and
infrastructure implications; and pressures on local governments to provide adequate public safety, health and
welfare regulations and services. However, critical examinations of the racialized geographies of fracking, and
their implications for just and sustainable environment planning, is missing from this research area and will thus
be examined and explored in this paper.
In my research, I seek to understand how constructions of race, culture, and landscape may influence local,
regional and state energy planning and policy and community responses to fracking in border colonias. I ask the
following research questions: What local, state, and national actors and processes shape the fracking industry in
colonias? How does fracking shape everyday experiences and produce racialized landscape in colonias? What are
the responses to the fracking industry in colonias by residents, civil society organizers, and others?
I am conducting multi-sited ethnography informed by post-structural political ecology (Finewood and Stroup,
2013; see also Heynen 2003; Heynen, et al., 2006) and environment justice (Agyeman, Bullard, and Evans, 2002)
to better understand the spatialized expressions and implications of fracking, and critical race theory and
Chican@ epistemologies, in particular the work of Laura Pulido and Devon Peña, to unpack the racial complexities
on the Texas-Mexico border. To investigate the actors and processes that shape fracking in Texas, I am
interviewing officials, industry officials, and activists and I am documenting extractive industry legislation during
the 2015 Texas State Legislative Session. I am also conducting archival research in order to analyze property
deeds in relation to mineral rights, and I am analyzing historical changes in the legal codes and legislation
governing the oil and gas industry and colonia planning and development. To document how fracking shapes
everyday experiences and produce racialized landscape in colonias, I am conducting GIS analysis coupled with
interviews and participant observations with residents and community leaders. And to document responses to
the fracking industry, including any forms of organizing and protest, I am conducting participant observations and
informal interviews with organizers and residents. I will conclude by discussing how this interdisciplinary research
can contribute to theory, practice, and ultimately offer policy and planning recommendations to prevent the
further marginalization of border colonias and other vulnerable comminuty impacted by fracking.
References
 Agyeman J, Bullard R and Evans B (2002) Exploring the nexus: Bringing together sustainability,
environmental justice and equity. Space and Polity 6(1):70–90.
 Energy Information Administration. (2014, February) “Eagle Ford production increasingly targets oil-rich
areas”, accessed online from http://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.cfm?id=14951
 Finewood, M., and L. Stroup. (2013). Fracking and the Neoliberalization of the Hydro-Social Cycle in
Pennsylvania's Marcellus Shale. Journal of Contemporary Water Research and Education (147) 72-79.
 Heynen N C. (2003). The scalar production of injustice within the urban forest. Antipode 35(5):980–998.



Heynen N, Perkins H A and Roy P. (2006). The political ecology of uneven urban green space: The impact
of political economy on race and ethnicity in producing environment inequality in Milwaukee. Urban
Affairs Review 42(1):3–25.

Abstract Index #: 120
ANALYSIS OF RESPONSES OF RURAL WATER USERS TO WATER TRANSFERS IN THE CONTEXT OF TAMIL NADU,
INDIA
Abstract System ID#: 879
Individual Paper
GNANASEKARAN, Shanmuga Priya [University of Colorado Denver] shanmuga.gnanasekaran@ucdenver.edu
This paper analyses the responses of water users in the rural regions to the rural-urban water transfer practices
in a selected case in India, to gain insight into the inter- and cross-scale dynamics of such responses, and to
explore how rural and urban regions can adjust and mutually support each other in the water transfer
processes.
Water transfers, implemented to meet the growing urban water demands, are typically analyzed based on
simplified models. city in developing countries, particularly in India, frequently appropriate water from distant
and largely rural supplies originally purposed for irrigation to meet the demand for water. When water is in short
supply relative to demand in water supplying regions, rural-urban water transfers have multiple consequences
both direct and secondary in the water supplying rural regions. Often, the  impact depend on the way water
transfers are implemented, the way the supplying region responds to changes in water availability and the kind of
management mechanisms governments put in place to assist farmers managing this transition. However, past
empirical inquiries regarding the impact of water transfers on preexisting uses in water supplying regions ignore
these intervening or modifying mechanisms, and as a result, present contrasting results.
Issues associated with water can be analyzed from multiple perspectives. As water and social system are
inextricably interlinked, this study aims to bring together many interrelated variables in the social system in the
analysis and synthesize their complex dynamics of change in the chosen water transfer case in the state of Tamil
Nadu, India. Specifically, this research analyzes how people and nature organize around change by focusing upon
the individual and societal responses that rural-urban water transfers induce, and the social, institutional and
ecological feedback effects they provoke. Literature on adaptive capacity and social-ecological system informs
the identification of pertinent variables in this study.
This study employed a mixed method approach to capture the complexity of the response process. The analysis
involved the following steps. First, diverse responses of farmers were analyzed in terms of whether they were
coping or adaptation mechanisms to the perceived or actual changes. Then, association between different
farmers’ characteristics and their responses were analyzed quantitatively to identify the characteristics highly
influencing the responses. Next, qualitative interview data is used to capture the processes that influence the
response capacity of farmers and the feedback mechanism at different scales. Based on the analysis, the
characteristics of the response space and its implication at other scales as well as for the future of the rural area
are interpreted.
The results demonstrate that the study area is characterized by heterogeneous farmers with different levels of
response capacity resulting in different forms of responses. The diverse responses by farmers help in the adaptive
maintenance of agricultural activities in the region and show the resiliency of individuals in the face of change.
However, these responses, mostly short-term coping strategies, do not improve their resiliency for future shocks
and reinforce the existing undesirable system attributes that may lead to unplanned transformation in the near
future.
Depending on the continuity or change of responses by farmers, the study region may follow different future
trajectories. To explore the various future possibilities, three plausible scenarios and planning recommendations

are presented. How the rural regions can make internal adjustments and urban regions can interact with rural
regions and enhance the resilience in return for using water from rural regions is explored in these scenarios.
The narratives of alternate possibilities pave the way for development of support measures and policy. The
insights and solutions developed in this study may be extended to other places and developmental activities in
developing countries exhibiting similar characteristics.
References
 Adger, N. W. (2000). Social and ecological resilience: Are they related? Progress in Human Geography,
24(3), 347-364.
 Berkes, F., and Folke, C. (Eds.). (1998). Linking social and ecological system: Management practices and
social mechanisms for building resilience. New York: Cambridge University Press.
 Celio, M., Scott, C. A., & Giordano, M. (2010). Urban-agricultural water appropriation: The Hyderabad,
India case. Geographical Journal, 176 (1), 39-57.
 Ostrom, E. (2009). A General Framework for Analyzing Sustainability of Social-Ecological system.
Science, 325 (5939), 419–22.
 Walker, B., Holling, C. S., Carpenter, S. R., and Kinzig. A. (2004). Resilience, adaptability and
transformability in social–ecological system. Ecology and Society 9(2): 5.

Abstract Index #: 121
CAN WE REBUILD BY DESIGN? AN ASSESSMENT OF RECOVERY THROUGH COMPETITION IN POST-SANDY NEW
YORK
Abstract System ID#: 884
Individual Paper
FLEMING, William [University of Pennsylvania] wflem@design.upenn.edu
Rebuild by Design (RBD) began in the summer of 2013 as the principal federal response to the fallout from
Superstorm Sandy. The competition explicitly sought to redefine the federal approach to disaster recovery.
Rather than pursuing recovery through reconstruction, RBD aimed to realize recovery through competition. It
also implicitly pursued an agenda of climate change adaptation, capitalizing on the imprimatur of crisis to
neutralize an otherwise obstinate set of political constraints around the issue. This paper seeks to assess the
merits of RBD’s recovery through competition model and to relate its various challenges and successes back
towards the larger policy question: how should city prepare for and respond to disaster?
RBD was structured as a four-stage, interdisciplinary design competition and its primary goal was to “promote
innovation by developing regionally-scalable but locally contextual solutions that increase resilience in the [New
York] region.” The first stage involved an international RFP and it resulted in the selection of ten teams comprised
of urban designers, city planners, civil engineers, ecologists and others to participate in the competition. The
second stage assigned each team a unique set of sites along the region’s coastline to research and begin engaging
in the planning process. The third and fourth stages challenged each team to develop a series of design and policy
interventions that could be scaled up from a single site throughout the rest of the region. The proposals
generated during this final stage were then reviewed by a national jury of planning, design, and public policy
experts and, in the summer of 2014, six proposals were selected for further refinement and implementation.
Each received a share of nearly $1 billion in Community Development Block Grant Disaster Recovery funding.
The recovery-through competition model of RBD represents a novel approach to disaster recovery that merits
greater attention from scholars. The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development has already moved to
nationalize the model via its National Disaster Resilience Competition. Yet relatively little is known about the
successes and challenges of the RBD outside of the tightly-controlled coverage provided by the popular press.
This paper aims to complicate the narrative surrounding RBD and to assess its merits as a mechanism for disaster
recovery. It is organized around two core research questions: (1) how did RBD perform as an instrument of
disaster recovery in New York? and (2) what are the tradeoffs between RBD’s recovery-through-competition
model and other modes of disaster recovery?

To respond to these questions, I employed a two-phase qualitative research design. First, I conducted twenty-six
semi-structured interviews with key informants from the RBD competition. This includes leaders from each of the
ten design teams engaged in the competition, leaders from the governmental and philanthropic institutions
administering the competition, and leaders from the primary neighborhood groups affiliated with the
competition.
Second, I performed a content analysis of ten design proposals and plans submitted for review by RBD’s national
jury. These proposals were assessed for their adherence to the competition’s goals, their relative feasibility, and
their potential impact. The findings from this evaluation include urban design-related recommendations for the
deployment of soft, coastal infrastructure and urban policy-focused recommendations for the deployment of
future competition-based recovery efforts.
References
 Birch, E. & Wachter, S. (Eds.) 2006. Rebuilding Urban Places after Disaster: Lessons from Hurricane
Katrina. Philadelphia: The University of Pennsylvania Press.
 Gotham, K. and Greenberg, M. 2014. Crisis city: Disaster and Redevelopment in New York and New
Orleans. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
 Cutter, Susan. 2002. American Hazardscapes: The Regionalization of Hazards and Disasters. New York:
Joseph Henry Press.
 Newman, P., Beatley, T., and Boyer, H. 2009. Resilient city: Responding to Peak Oil and Climate
Change. Island Press.
 Colten, C. 2009. Perilous Place, Powerful Storms: Hurricane Protection in Coastal Louisiana. Oxford, MS:
University Press of Mississippi.

Abstract Index #: 122
A COMPARATIVE ASSESSMENT OF THE SECTION 319 PLANNING PROCESS IN SOUTH CAROLINA
Abstract System ID#: 891
Individual Paper
DYCKMAN, Caitlin [Clemson University] cdyckma@clemson.edu
Although  land_use choices and land cover are dominant contributors to U.S. water pollution through the diffuse
nonpoint sources (NPS) that they generate, previous work (White forthcoming; Conroy forthcoming; Dyckman
forthcoming) suggests that planners have not been substantially involved in the federal Clean Water Act’s Section
319 planning process in pilot study states of Kansas, Ohio, and South Carolina. Like hazard mitigation planning,
planning practitioners appear to have been ancillary or separated from an integral planning process that is
immediately affected by concurrent yet parallel  land_use decisions in the comprehensive plans for the
watershed’s primary city or county. Other scholars have shown that NPS watershed planning is predominately
conducted by collaborative, place-based watershed groups that vary considerably in their composition,
formalization, and water quality typology, resulting in questionable pollutant removal and watershed plan
implementation efficacy (Hoornbeek et al. 2013; Hardy and Koontz 2008). These findings affirm those of planning
scholars, who have shown that the absence of the planner has the potential to influence plan quality and its
implementation in hazard mitigation (Lyles et al. 2014; Burby et al. 1998). But no one has studied why planners
have been active in or absent from these horizontally related but essential planning processes (particularly
watershed based planning) that bolster standard comprehensive plans.
This work seeks to do so in South Carolina, as part of a larger, comparative study of Kansas, Ohio, and South
Carolina to address the traditional planning and watershed-based planning under Section 319. Like the other
chosen pilot states, South Carolina is predominantly rural. However, it is experiencing urbanization in the top of
the state’s watersheds, and its primary NPS contaminant is fecal coliform.

Building on a previous survey of planning practitioners in the state, the methodology consists of two sets of
interview subjects and two separate interview instruments. The first includes expert interviews with the state’s
Section 319 grant coordinators (n = 1 – 3, depending on institutional history over the lifetime of the Section 319
program) to garner the state coordinator’s perspective on the watershed based planning process and resulting
plan product, as well as his/her expert advice in recommending watersheds for case studies. The second set of
interviews involve participants in the recommended watersheds, narrowed to two case study watersheds which
are physically similar (in size, urbanization/rural ratio, pollutants, etc.) but contrasting in the presence of a
planner in the watershed-based planning process (whether in their official capacity or otherwise). The
interviewees (n = 10 – 15) in each case study watershed include: (1) planners who participated (if present), (2)
other participants listed in the watershed-based plans, (3) participants not listed but noted by the Section 319
grants coordinator or other listed participants, ascertained through a snowball sampling approach.
The results will be analyzed using content analysis, and are expected to reveal the impetus for the presence or
absence of the planners in the Section 319 watershed planning process in South Carolina, in order to (1) further
elucidate the extent of and motivation for the planner’s participation in both the Section 319 grants and the
watershed planning process that follows from the grants more generally; (2) provide a basis for watershed-based
plan quality assessment; (3) be an eventual input in the plan implementation assessment for watershed-based
plans in the pilot states noted above; and (4) contribute to the broader motivations for planner involvement in
horizontal but ancillary forms of planning.
References
 Burby, R.J. with co-authors. 1998. “Policies for Sustainable  land_use” in Burby, R.J, ed., Cooperating with
Nature: Confronting Natural Hazards with Land-Use Planning for Sustainable comminuty. Washington,
D.C.: John Henry Press. 263 – 292.
 Hardy, S.D. & T.M. Koontz. 2008. Reducing Nonpoint Source Pollution Through Collaboration: policy
and program Across the U.S. States. environment Management 41: 301 – 310.
 Hoornbeek, J., E. Hansen, E. Ringquist & R. Carlson. 2013. Implementing Water Pollution Policy in the
United States: Total Maximum Daily Loads and Collaborative Watershed Management. Society & Natural
Resources 26: 420 – 436.
 Lyles, L.W., P. Berke & G. Smith. 2014. Do Planners Matter? Examining Factors Driving Incorporation of
 land_use Approaches into Hazard Mitigation Plans. Journal of environment Planning and Management
57:5, 792 – 811.

Abstract Index #: 123
PROMISING PRACTICES IN LOCAL PLANNING FOR CHEMICAL HAZARDS
Abstract System ID#: 907
Individual Paper
BIERLING, David [Texas A&M University] dhb@tamu.edu, presenting author, primary author
ROGERS, George [Texas A & M University] grogers@tamu.edu
In 2013 national attention became refocused on local planning for chemical hazards due to the industrial fertilizer
plant disaster in West, Texas. Local emergency planning committees (LEPCs) are key local organizations with
federally-designated responsibility for emergency planning and ensuring community right-to-know about
chemical hazards at fixed facilities and in the transportation system (Gablehouse, 2005; Lindell & Whitney, 1995).
Most LEPCs operate primarily on volunteer effort with extremely limited available funding (Gablehouse, 2005;
Bierling, et al, 2011). Thus, while a variety of local emergency planning activities are potentially available
(McEntire & Myers, 2005), those activities that LEPCs undertake must be practical and achievable. This research
examines the factors that contribute to success of local comminuty’ planning for hazardous chemicals transport
emergencies. During Summer 2015, the authors are conducting focus groups with three to five LEPCs in Texas to
identify lessons-learned and promising practices utilized. The focus groups will cover the planning projects these
organizations have conducted and the factors (Lindell & Whitney, 1995; Rogers & Sorensen, 1991) that
contributed to the project outcomes. Organizational, individual, and process characteristics for different project

types will be presented, along with recommendations for maximizing return on effort given organizational
constraints such as resource limitations.
References
 Bierling, D.H., Rogers, G.O., Jasek, D.J., Protopapas, A.A., Warner, J.E., & Olson, L.E. (2011). Guidebook
for Conducting Local Hazardous Materials Commodity Flow Studies. HMCRP Report 3. Washington, DC:
Transportation Research Board of The National Academies.
 Gablehouse, T. R. (2005). The role of local comminuty in chemical accident prevention and
preparedness. Journal of Loss Prevention in the Process Industries, 18(4-6), 549-552.
 Lindell, M. K., & Whitney, D. J. (1995). Effects of organizational environment, internal structure, and
team climate on the effectiveness of local emergency planning committees. Risk Analysis, 15(4), 439447.
 McEntyre, D. A., & Myers, A. (2004). Preparing comminuty for disaster: Issues and processes for
government readiness. Disaster Prevention and Management: An International Journal, 13(2), 140-152.
 Rogers, G. O., & Sorensen, J. H. (1991). Adoption of emergency planning practices for chemical hazards
in the United States. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 27(1), 3-26.

Abstract Index #: 124
THE environment AND ECONOMIC  impact OF MOORAGE MARINAS ON THE WEST COAST
Abstract System ID#: 910
Individual Paper
TRUMBULL, Nathaniel [University of Connecticut] trumbull@uconn.edu, presenting author
BAE, Christine [Department of Urban Design & Planning, University of Washington] cbae@uw.edu, primary
author
JON, Ihnji [University of Washington] ihnji.jon@gmail.com
MOORE, James [University of Southern California] jmoore@usc.edu
PARK, Jiyoung [University at Buffalo, The State University of New York] jp292@buffalo.edu
GUO, Tongtong [University of Southern California] guotongtong2003@gmail.com
Marinas have been seriously under-researched in planning: “We have virtually ignored oceans and marine
environments in modern planning, policy, and design of city” (Beatley 2014, p. xi). This is in spite of the fact that
the development of marinas is expanding nationwide. There is lack of research on how mooring facilities harm
the marine environment and shoreline health as a result of oil spills, toxic painting of boats and docking facilities,
soap, sewage and waste discharges, and other environment consequences and the extent to which these are
offset by regional economic benefits. In this paper we focus on two locations: Washington State and Marina Del
Rey, California. Both are illustrative of how to resolve the trade-off between environment and economic
impacts, but in different ways. Washington probably has the most rigid environment regulations in the country
(although the Habitat Conservation Plan proposed by the Department of Natural Resources was held up) and the
costliest tax laws on marina boat owners. Marina Del Rey, California is the largest man-made marina in the world
(with 5,300 boat slips), and is trying to balance the costs of a massive dredging program with the economic and
social benefits that result one of the most valuable community assets in Los Angeles County. We combine two
models to analyze the two different aspects (i.e., economic and environment) of these questions to meet the
project goals. First, for the positive economic impact analysis, we will use state-level input-output (IO) models,
based on data and software from MIG (formerly the Minnesota IMPLAN Group) Inc.’s IMPLAN (Impact analysis
for Planning) (Gordon et al., 2007; Park et al., 2013, 2011).The result is a regional economic analysis system that
can combine all counties and states into a single study area, yielding a complete set of regional social accounts.
The USDA (US Department of Agriculture) Forest Service developed IMPLAN in the mid-1970s for community
impact analysis, and, at present, over 1,500 clients across the U.S. use the IMPLAN model. The current IMPLAN
model and input-output database remains an agency standard for the USDA’s Natural Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS). Second, to measure the negative  impact, a quasi-experimental methodology will be used to
quantify the environment burdens (Shadish et al., 2002; Park et al., 2009). For the negative environment
costs, we will survey the costs of mediation eco-friendly measures for the clean marinas, and moorage fees for

boat owners. Combined, the net values of the economic gains and environment externalities can be used in the
Southern California and Washington to explore more effective coastal development strategies for recreational
vessel moorings. The research makes use of extensive economic and environment data collection from marina
facilities in the West Coast comminuty. Public funding to reduce environment damages and extracting
payments from boat owners is too limited. city and neighborhood close to marinas receive significant tax
revenues from the indirect and induced spending (measured by the application of a highly spatially disaggregated
multiregional input-output model) and marinas may offer recreational benefits to regional residents. Surrounding
local governments may be persuaded to contribute to the provision of resources that can mitigate environment
damages. The overall policy goal is to find ways of reducing the environment costs with minimal damage to the
substantial economic and social benefits.
References
 Beatley, T. 2014. Blue Urbanism: Exploring Connections between city and Oceans. New York: Island
Press.
 Beyers, W. and A. Lin. 2012. The Washington State Input-Output Model. Olympia, WA: Office of Financial
Management.
 Briceno, T. and G. Schundler. 2015. Economic Analysis of Outdoor Recreation in Washington State.
Tacoma, WA: Earth Economics.
 Gordon, P, JE Moore, II, JY Park, and HW Richardson, 2007. The Economic  impact of a Terrorist Attack
on the US Commercial Aviation System, Risk Analysis, 27 (3): 505-512.
 Kenchington, R. and D. Crawford. 1993. “On the meaning of integration in coastal zone management,”
Ocean and Coastal Management. Vol. 21: 109–127.

Abstract Index #: 125
EXAMINING DETERMINANTS OF RESIDENTIAL ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN THE U.S: A PANEL APPROACH
Abstract System ID#: 929
Individual Paper
CHO, Jaewoo [University of California, Irvine] jaewooc4@uci.deu
Given growing concern about global warming and natural resource depletion, energy issues have been placed
high on the agenda of planning research. In particular, recent years have witnessed an increasing number of
studies in the planning discipline devoted to understanding the nature of residential energy consumption, which
accounts for approximately one fifth of total energy use and is expected to increase over the next few decades,
as well as that in transportation sectors (see e.g., see Newman and Kenworthy 1989, Ewing and Rong 2008,
Steemers and Yun 2009). Existing research on residential energy use has highlighted the significance of both
human and environment factors and provided a clue to identifying effective strategies for potential energy
saving, but our knowledge base about residential energy consumption dynamics still remains limited.
This study empirically investigates what determines individual households’ residential energy consumption in the
U.S. While previous research has typically been conducted at an aggregated geographical scale or with the use of
a cross-sectional dataset (Swan and Ugursal 2009), the present study employs a panel approach which has
advantages in controlling for unobserved factors and capturing the dynamics of energy consumption. More
specifically, it presents a “housing” panel analysis in which repeated observations of the same set of housing
units between 2001 and 2011 (provided by the American Housing Survey biannually) are utilized to reveal key
determinants of residential energy use and their varying effects.
The panel analysis shows that residential energy use is largely determined not only by energy price but also by
household composition, their life styles, duration of residence, and detailed housing unit characteristics.
Household income is also found to have significant  impact on the amount of energy consumption. The income
effects, however, exhibit quite distinct patterns in different groups of households, suggesting that the way
income and other household characteristics shape the level of energy consumption is complicated.

References
 Ewing, R., & Rong, F. (2008). The impact of urban form on US residential energy use. Housing Policy
Debate, 19(1), 1-30.
 Newman, P. W., & Kenworthy, J. R. (1989). Gasoline consumption and city: a comparison of US city
with a global survey. Journal of the American Planning Association, 55(1), 24-37.
 Steemers, K., & Yun, G. Y. (2009). Household energy consumption: a study of the role of occupants.
Building Research & Information, 37(5-6), 625-637.
 Swan, L. G., & Ugursal, V. I. (2009). Modeling of end-use energy consumption in the residential sector: A
review of modeling techniques. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 13(8), 1819-1835.

Abstract Index #: 126
FIRED UP: VULNERABILITY, RESILIENCE, EQUITY, AND FEDERAL WILDLAND FIREFIGHTER SAFETY POLICY IN
PERSPECTIVE
Abstract System ID#: 935
Poster
LOBBY, Samuel [University of Kansas] s396l619@ku.edu
A century of fire suppression policy, suburban development in wildland-urban interface area, and changes in
temperature and precipitation patterns due to climate change are leading to more intense fire seasons. As a
result, the once little known profession of wildland firefighting has been thrust into the public eye. Despite the
substantial influence Federal fire managers have over  land_use decisions, less is being done to address systemic
safety issues that exist within Federal fire safety policy, affecting firefighters who are carrying out land
management activities on the ground level. Major concerns include the absence of medics on Federal wildland
fire crews and a lack of training to provide supervisors with the knowledge required to identify serious medical
emergencies. In effect, this group of public employees is being marginalized due to Federal land management
safety policy, presenting a major equity concern.
Though Federal fire safety policy has evolved substantially over the last two decades in response to several
tragedy fires, many of these actions only address incremental rather than systemic problems. Specifically, new
protocols emphasize individual resilience of firefighters during medical emergencies, rather than addressing the
larger institutional problems within Federal land management safety policy that make firefighters vulnerable.
This project conducts a detailed policy analysis to identify barriers to the implementation of a medic position on
fire crews, such as multi-scalar jurisdictional concerns and mismatched safety policy among and within Federal
land management agencies. Methodological techniques include quantitative analysis to compare local fire district
budgets for the provision of safety equipment and resources among Federal land management agencies, as well
as qualitative interviews with firefighters and policy makers from Federal land management agencies.
This research will have implications for how Federal fire policy can be modified to increase the safety of the
firefighters who fill a critical role in land management of area under intense development pressure in the
western United States. Allowing firefighters to continue carrying out important land management activities
without the necessary safety resources presents a major equity issue that could be addressed through more
comprehensive Federal land management safety policy.
References
 Birkland, Thomas A. Lessons of Disaster: Policy Change after Catastrophic Events. Washington, D.C.:
Georgetown UP, 2006. Print.
 Evans, Brad, and Julian Reid. Resilient Life: The Art of Living Dangerously. Malden: Polity, 2014. Print.
 Mileti, Dennis S. Disasters by Design: A Reassessment of Natural Hazards in the United States.
Washington, D.C.: Joseph Henry, 1999. Print
 Tang, Ying, Shiyuan Zhong, Lifeng Lou, Xindi Bian, Warren E. Heilman, and Julie Winkler. The Potential
Impact of Regional Climate Change on Fire Weather in the United States.
Association of American
Geographers -- USDA Forest Service (2014): 1-21. Web.



Weick, Karl E., and Kathleen M. Sutcliffe. Managing the Unexpected: Resilient Performance in an Age of
Uncertainty. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2007. Print.

Abstract Index #: 127
SPATIAL EXPRESSION OF BIOLOGICAL CONSERVATION EASEMENTS IN FINE SCALE, SMALLER LAND TRUST
CONSERVATION
Abstract System ID#: 970
Individual Paper
LAURIA, Mickey [Clemson University] mlauria@clemson.edu, presenting author
DYCKMAN, Caitlin [Clemson University] cdyckma@clemson.edu, primary author
BALDWIN, Robert [Clemson University] baldwi6@clemson.edu
WHITE, David [Clemson University] WHITEDL@clemson.edu
As part of a larger project related to the shifting dynamics between conservation easement (CE) holders, CE
donors/sellers, regional  land_use pressures, and connections to other conserved lands, this research examines
the spatial expression and ecological integrity of CEs in different regions of the United States. We are doing so at
the fine scale, linking the national and regional policy structures with the parcel-level detail in order to determine
whether CEs with an enumerated biological purpose are more closely aligned and promote habitat connectivity
with other biologically conserved lands than CEs with other expressed purposes.
This research contributes to the body of literature on systematic conservation planning, which requires a
systematic process that accounts for ecosystem attributes, targets levels for particularly vulnerable and/or
irreplaceable populations, and generates connectivity standards (Margules & Pressey, 2000). A few
nongovernmental entities holding CEs have adopted a systematic conservation process for targeting private
lands—typically the most biologically valuable, but most efforts remain uncoordinated and ecologically ad hoc,
particularly with smaller land trusts.
Increasingly, conservation biologists are concerned about this problem, and are building a literature related to CE
propagation and private land conservation more generally (Rissman et al., 2007; Merenlender et al., 2004).
Development pressure and/or the other legally qualified uses for a CE may compromise the ecologic integrity of
that private land. In fact, there is a concern that the broad federal qualifications for CEs may encourage
piecemeal preservation of land with little ecologic value (Coombes, 2003; Boyd et al., 2000). While there is latent
public benefit value in land being conserved, its ecologic quality may be questionable (Rissman et al., 2007) and
the CE may allow more development than would otherwise occur on publicly managed land, or it may be
surrounded by leapfrog development, causing habitat fragmentation and isolation (Richardson & Bernard, 2011;
Rissman et al., 2007; Coombes, 2003). Arguably, preservation is better than no preservation, but CEs may also
increase land costs by removing developable land, potentially displacing growth into socially and environmently
questionable locations. With increased land costs, it may preclude outright fee simple purchase of ecologically
valuable lands.
To test the spatial expression of the biological CEs and their relationship with conserved lands versus those of CEs
with other purposes and their relationship with the same, the researchers collected parcel level assessment data
from 1997 through 2008 and generated a corresponding ArcGIS database with individual conservation easement
data from four counties in two pilot states (Sacramento and Sonoma Counties in California, and Boulder and
Mesa Counties in Colorado). Using spatial statistics, the researchers assessed distance from the ecological CEs to
the conserved lands and tested for autocorrelation using Moran’s I, as well as conducted the same for the CEs
with other purposes and their relationship to the conserved lands within each county. The results will determine
whether CEs with enumerated biological reasons in these counties are more highly correlated with other
conserved land and offer more biologically valuable habitat than CEs with non-biological purposes. They will also
determine whether basic conservation biology principles are being maintained on CEs with less systematic
conservation planning by smaller land trusts with a more opportunistic land conservation strategy. Finally, it will

reveal whether systematic planning is correlated with the kind of entity holding a CE, filling a needed gap in the
conservation planning literature.
References
 Coombes, Brad. 2003. Ecospatial Outcomes of Neoliberal Planning: Habitat Management in Auckland
Region, New Zealand. Environment and Planning B, Planning & Design 30(2), 201-218.
 Margules, C.R. and R.L. Pressey. 2000. Systematic Conservation Planning. Nature 405, 243-253.
 Merenlender, A. M., L. Huntsinger, G. Guthey, and S. K. Fairfax. 2004. Land Trusts and Conservation
Easements: Who Is Conserving What for Whom? Conservation Biology 18(1), 65-75.
 Richardson, Jesse J. and Amanda C. Bernard. 2011. Conservation Easements: New Perspectives in an
Evolving World: Zoning for Conservation Easements. Law and Contemporary Problems 74, 83-108.
 Rissman, Adena R., Lynn Lozier, Tosha Comendant, Peter Kareiva, Joseph M. Kiesecker, M. Rebecca
Shaw, and Adina M. Merenlender. 2007. Conservation Easements: Biodiversity Protection and Private
Use. Conservation Biology 21(3), 709-718.

Abstract Index #: 128
FUELING SKEPTICISM: A CRITIQUE OF A "SUSTAINABLE" city' ELECTRICITY GENERATION STRATEGIES
Abstract System ID#: 974
Individual Paper
COHEN, James [University of Maryland at College Park] jimcohen@umd.edu
In February 2015 the London-based Center for Economics and Business Research (CEBR) published its first – and
the world’s most recent -- ranking of the world’s most sustainable city. This particular rating scheme ranked
nations based on indicators in the categories of social (“people”), environment (“planet”), and economic
(“profit”)—roughly equivalent to the three “E’s” (“equity”, ”environment”, and “economy” that have also been
used in the sustainability lexicon. In the “planet” category, city were ranked based on indicators for energy
consumed per capita, renewable energy share of energy use, recycling rates, greenhouse gas emissions, natural
catastrophe risk, drinking water sanitation, and air pollution. Consistent with sustainably rankings by other
organizations, European city earned the top six scores and ten of the top 12 scores in this category.
Systems for ranking the environment sustainability of city often use indicators for the proportion of a city’s
energy that is supplied by non-fossil fuel energy sources, such as solar, wind, hydropower, geothermal and the
burning of biomass. In fact, several of the highly-ranked European nations are relying increasingly on the burning
of biomass and, in some cases, of garbage, for their electricity generation. Proponents of biomass-to-energy or
heat argue that when biomass (such as trees) is burned, the CO2 that is released from the burning is cancelled
out by the CO2 that is captured by the trees planted to replace those used for fuel. This is the logic used by the
Global Footprint Network when it calculates ecological footprints of the world’s nations (M. Wackernagel et al.,
2014). However, Walker et al. (2013) argue that that several factors determine whether wood burning can
approach being a carbon neutral form of heat and electricity generation, and that in certain scenario using
biomass can actually produce more CO2 than the burning of fossil fuel. Research by Haugen (2013) draws a
similar conclusion.
Proponents of utilizing garbage to generate electricity argue that using the most recent technology such as that
deployed in some European city, not only produces little pollution but saves landfill space (Themilis and
Massehe, 2014). Other researchers, such as Chandel et al. (2012) maintain that the most advanced garbage-tofuel technologies generate greenhouse gases and remove incentives for minimizing throughput.
This paper examines the degree to which the world city ranked in the top 20 for the “planet” category of the
2014 CEBR study either do -- or intend to -- increasingly rely on, the burning of biomass and/or of garbage for
generating electricity, for which they get credit for utilizing “renewable” energy sources. The paper then
summarizes the current debates, and draws conclusions, on whether and the degree to which the burning of
biomass, and of garbage, should be encouraged as renewable and ecologically-friendly energy sources. The

paper concludes with ideas on the roles that planners can play in helping the discussion and resolution of the
controversies over these two strategies for “sustainable” electricity generation.
References
 Chandel, M, G. Kwok, R. Jackson and L. Pratson. 2012. The potential of waste-to-energy in reducing GWG
emissions. Carbon Management 3 (2) 133-144.
 Haugen, D. (2013). Does wood burning Instead of fossil fuels increase GHG emissions? MidwestEnergy
News. May 10.
 Themelis, N. and C. Mussche. 2014. Energy and economic value of municipal solid waste, including nonrecycled plastics, currently landfilled in the fifty states. Columbia University Earth Engineering Center.
 Wackernagel, M., Cranston, G., Morales, J.C., Galli, A., 2014. Ecological Footprint Accounts. In: Handbook
of Sustainable Development: second revised edition. Atkinson, G., Dietz, S., Neumayer, E., Agarwala, M.
(eds). Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, Glos, UK
 Walker, T. P. (2013). Carbon accounting for woody biomass from Massachusetts managed forests: A
framework for determining the temporal  impact of wood biomass energy on atmospheric greenhouse
gas levels. Journal of Sustainable Forestry, 32 (1-2)

Abstract Index #: 129
SHARING city: A CASE FOR TRULY SMART, JUST AND SUSTAINABLE city
Abstract System ID#: 989
Pre-organized Session: Justice, Sustainability & the City: Possible Paths
AGYEMAN, Julian [Tufts University] Julian.agyeman@tufts.edu
The future of humanity is urban, and the nature of urban space enables, and necessitates, sharing--of resources,
goods and services, experiences. Yet traditional forms of sharing have been undermined in modern city by
social fragmentation and commercialization of the public realm. In Sharing city I argue that the intersection of
cities’ highly networked physical space with new digital technologies and new mediated forms of sharing offers
cities the opportunity to connect smart technology to justice, solidarity, and sustainability.
In effect I propose a new “sharing paradigm,” which goes beyond the faddish “sharing economy”--seen in such
ventures as Uber and TaskRabbit--to envision models of sharing that are not always commercial but also
communal, encouraging trust and collaboration. Detailed case studies of San Francisco, Seoul, Copenhagen,
Medellin, Amsterdam, and Bengaluru (formerly Bangalore) contextualize the authors’ discussions of collaborative
consumption and production; the shared public realm, both physical and virtual; the design of sharing to enhance
equity and justice; and the prospects for scaling up the sharing paradigm though city governance. I show how
sharing could shift values and norms, enable civic engagement and political activism, and rebuild a shared urban
commons. Their case for sharing and solidarity offers a powerful alternative for urban futures to conventional
“race-to-the-bottom” narratives of competition, enclosure, and division
References
 Agyeman, Julian, Duncan McLaren, and Adrianne Schaefer-Borrego. Sharing city. 2013. Available at
http://www.foe.co.uk/sites/default/files/downloads/agyeman_sharing_cities.pdf
 Belk, Russell W. “Why Not Share Rather Than Own.” Annals of the American Academy of Political and
Social Science 611 (2007): 126–140.
 Orsi, Janelle, Yassi Eskandari-Qajar, Eve Weissman, Molly Hall, Ari Mann, and Mira Luna. policy for
Shareable city: A Sharing Economy Policy Primer for Urban Leaders. Oakland, CA: Shareable and the
Sustainable Economies Law Center, 2013. Available at http://www.shareable.net/blog/policies-for-ashareable-city.
 Botsman, Rachel. “The Case for Collaborative Consumption.” TEDx Sydney, May 2010. Available at
http://www.ted.com/talks/rachel_botsman_the_case_for_collaborative_consumption.html.



Lamberton Cait, P., and L. Randall. “Rose, “When Is Ours Better than Mine? A Framework for
Understanding and Altering Participation in Commercial Sharing system.” Journal of Marketing 76 (4)
(2012): 109–125.

Abstract Index #: 130
NEW WATER WAYS? ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE FOR DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE IN SAN FRANCISCO’S WATER
SECTOR
Abstract System ID#: 996
Individual Paper
SOLIS, Miriam [University of California, Berkeley] mvs@berkeley.edu
This paper examines if and how water utilities are undergoing organizational change to incorporate distributive
justice in wastewater capital improvement plans. Utilities’ planning decisions are conventionally made through
the application of a market logic that has adversely impacted low-income comminuty and people of color.
Environmental justice scholarship has shown that the lack of service provision, the siting of large treatment
plants, and combined sewer overflows are among the wastewater planning concerns that burden low-income
communities of color. In a classic case study, Spirn (2005) chronicles the challenges faced by the residents of
Philadelphia’s Mill Creek neighborhood, where homes and a sewer were built on a floodplain, creating health and
safety hazards for its residents. Yet water utilities in the United States are by and large public institutions, and
some are responding to the environment injustices that they create or compound. This is plausible, since
organizations rarely reify a single logic; multiple logics can co-exist, even if they conflict (Thornton and Ocasio
2009). This paper thus asks, How are utilities undergoing organizational change to incorporate environment
justice? What are the implications of these changes for the realization of distributive justice?
I answer these questions through a case study of environment justice efforts, and associated organizational
change, in San Francisco’s most recent wastewater capital improvement program. As the utility undertakes this
twenty-year, $7 billion endeavor, it is also working to incorporate new environment justice policy. The paper
draws on several conceptual and theoretical frameworks. Literature on ‘institutional logics’ guides the
comparison of market and environment justice logics in water utilities. Organizational changes that have
occurred as a result of the uptake of a logic of environment justice are identified using Scott’s (2014) framework
on institutional pillars and carriers. The implications of these organizational changes for distributive justice are
identified using Schweitzer and Valenzuela’s (2004) classification of claims of environment injustice. Findings
provide insight on the constraints and possibilities of reifying distributive justice in wastewater planning through
organizational change.
References
 Schweitzer, Lisa, and Abel Valenzuela. 2004. “Environmental Injustice and Transportation: The Claims
and the Evidence.” Journal of Planning Literature 18 (4): 383–98.
 Scott, James C. 1999. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have
Failed. New edition. Yale University Press.
 Spirn, Anne. 2005. “Restoring Mill Creek: Landscape Literacy, environment Justice and City Planning
and Design.” Landscape Research 30 (3): 395–413.
 Thornton, Patricia H., and William Ocasio. 2008. “Institutional Logics.” The Sage Handbook of
Organizational Institutionalism 840: 99–128.

Abstract Index #: 131
CONSIDERING HUMAN SUBSYSTEMS IN UNDERSTANDING AND MANAGING NEARSHORE WATER QUALITY IN
LAKE ONTARIO
Abstract System ID#: 1011
Individual Paper

HWANG, Ha [University at Buffalo, SUNY] hahwang@buffalo.edu, presenting author, primary author
FRIEDMAN, Kathryn [State University of New York at Buffalo] kbf@buffalo.edu
Despite heavy investment in phosphorous abatement program in the 1980s in response to mandates established
with the Grate Lakes Water Quality Agreement, eutrophication has re-emerged as a significant concern in
shallower, nearshore regions of the Great Lakes. This problem highlights the complexities of Great Lakes
ecosystems as they respond not only to natural stress, but also to human management. Main stresses on the
nearshore region include the invasion of dreissenid mussels and the creation of a biological filter shunting
phosphorus to the coastal zone, hydrodynamic controls on cross-margin material fluxes, and  land_use changes,
with associated changes in watershed inputs. Climate change underlies each of these processes, affecting the
thermal regime of the lake, and altering water supply and associated habitat.
The nearshore problem has significant economic consequences, including temporary shutdowns of power plants.
For example, the Fitzpatrick nuclear power plant near Oswego, New York was closed for several days in the fall of
2007 due to algae clogging of intake cooling water filters, at a cost of $1 million per day. Other  impact include
beach closings, declining recreation and land values due to excessive growth of nearshore nuisance algae (e.g.,
Cladophora), increased occurrence of harmful algal blooms and associated toxin production, shifts in fish
community production and species dominance that affect sport fisheries, and increased costs associated with
drinking water treatment.
Whereas eutrophication science is relatively well-established, less is known about the Great Lakes human
subsystem that  impact and interacts with the environment subsystem. Scholarship tends to focus on the
configuration and capacity of domestic institutional arrangements or the connection between uncertainty and
decision-making to explain progress on the Great Lakes, however, much remains to be explored with respect to
the interaction between policy, economy, education, and science—the crux of sustainability—within the context
of the Great Lakes coastal ecosystem.
In this paper, we examined human subsystems, particularly focusing on the Genesee River watershed within the
Lake Ontario nearshore ecosystem. A network survey was distributed to decision-makers, resource managers,
scientists, and stakeholders, who are particularly working for water quality issue of the study area. The main goal
of this study is to identify information and knowledge transfer mechanisms and pathways underlying the
decision-making process of water quality management specific to the study area using Social Network Analysis.
For example, we can identify knowledge brokers, who have high betweenness centrality scores, to disseminate
innovative water quality management knowledge and measures effectively. In addition, we can diagnose the
sustainability of human subsystems with network parameters such as network density and cohesiveness.
References
 Johns, C. (2009). Water pollution in the Great Lakes Basin: the global–local dynamic. environment
Challenges and Opportunities: Local–global Perspectives on Canadian Issues Edmond Montgomery, 95129.
 Rabe, B. G. (1996). An empirical examination of innovations in integrated environment management:
The case of the Great Lakes Basin. Public Administration Review, 372-381.
 DePinto, J. V., Young, T. C., & McIlroy, L. M. (1986). Impact of phosphorus control measures on water
quality of the Great Lakes. Environ. Sci. Technol, 20(8), 752-759.

Abstract Index #: 132
THE IMPACT OF WILDLIFE REFUGE DESIGNATION ON SUBURBAN LAND DEVELOPMENT
Abstract System ID#: 1019
Individual Paper
BRAZA, Mark [Federal Government & University of Maryland] brazam@gmail.com

Land conservation is a primary tool for protecting natural resources and setting aside open space. For example,
the National Wildlife Refuge System provides an estimated $27 billion per year of ecosystem services such as
habitat, waste assimilation and water filtration (Ingraham and Foster 2008). During recent years, some studies
have suggested that land conservation, by providing a residential amenity, may inadvertently attract leapfrog
development (Wu and Plantinga 2003; Irwin and Bockstael 2004). Such development could undercut the
objectives of land conservation by fragmenting surrounding habitat and fostering urban growth. Other studies
have suggested that public reserves could attract private conservation, thereby reinforcing their impact on
natural resources (Albers, Ando and Chen 2008). This study uses a sample of national wildlife refuges to assess
the impact of protected area on municipal  land_use. Following the Propensity Score Matching method used by
Andam et al. (2008), tracts inside of protected area are matched with similar control tracts located outside of
the protected area. Tracts are matched based on conditions in 1991 using the National Land Cover Database
(NLCD). Based on theory in urban spatial structure and conservation reserve design, tracts are matched both on
habitat characteristics (such as land cover) and development potential (such as travel distance to regional
centers). The  land_use for protected and control tracts are compared 20 years later using the 2010 NLCD. This
study provides quasi-experimental estimates of the impact of one of the major federal land protection program
over multiple decades both in terms of the amount of development attracted by protected area and the amount
of development prevented by them. The results can be used to inform efforts to manage protected area and to
plan for municipal growth while reducing unintended consequences.
References
 Andam, Kwaw S., et al. "Measuring the effectiveness of protected area networks in reducing
deforestation." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105.42 (2008): 16089-16094.
 Albers, Heidi J., Amy W. Ando, and Xiaoxuan Chen. "Spatial-econometric analysis of attraction and
repulsion of private conservation by public reserves." Journal of environment Economics and
Management 56.1 (2008): 33-49.
 Ingraham, Molly W., and Shonda Gilliland Foster. "The value of ecosystem services provided by the US
National Wildlife Refuge System in the contiguous US." Ecological Economics 67.4 (2008): 608-618.
 Irwin, Elena G., and Nancy E. Bockstael. " land_use externalities, open space preservation, and urban
sprawl." Regional science and urban economics 34.6 (2004): 705-725.
 Wu, JunJie, and Andrew J. Plantinga. "The influence of public open space on urban spatial structure."
Journal of environment Economics and Management 46.2 (2003): 288-309.

Abstract Index #: 133
NEIGHBORHOODS AND GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE: OPPORTUNITIES FOR SPATIAL PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 1030
Individual Paper
MULLER, Brian [University of Colorado Boulder] brian.h.muller@colorado.edu
This project explores opportunities for a neighborhood planning approach to green infrastructure development
(Benedict and McMahon 2006). Neighborhood planning strategies have been used for many years in US city but
only recently have been applied to problems of green infrastructure development including stormwater and
shade (Lovell and Taylor 2013). This paper introduces a spatial planning approach to neighborhood-scale green
infrastructure design. This method has three stages: evaluation of opportunities based on assessment of
neighborhood characteristics and morphologies; evaluation of risks based on neighborhood historical data
including inundation and heat pattern as well as social data; and evaluation of design scenarios based on public
health benefits defined according to indicators such as surface heat and run-off reduction (Muller, et. al, 2014).
Our work is organized on a high-resolution GIS platform and available as a model for manipulation in policy and
design environments. We applied this approach at a case study neighborhood (Park Hill) in Denver, Colorado.
Intervention scenarios were developed through a community-engagement process, reassessed and refined in the
context of a risk-opportunity framework, and evaluated against public health effect. The results of this project
suggest that benefits of neighborhood-scale green infrastructure analysis and planning include access to high
resolution spatial data, access to community knowledge, opportunity for analysis of interactive effects across

synergistic green infrastructure system, and opportunity for scaling-down of the municipal climate adaptation
planning process.
References
 Benedict, MA and ET McMahon. 2006. Green infrastructure. Island Press, Washington, DC.
 Muller, Brian, Travis Flohr and Mehdi Heris. 2014. Urban Morphology and Heat: Exploring the
Relationships. In Francesco Moccia (ed.) Sustainable Stormwater Management Infrastructures: Principles
and Guidelines. Naples: Clean Press.
 Lovell, Sarah Taylor and John R, Taylor. 2013. Supplying Urban Ecosystem Services Through
Multifunctional Green Infrastructure in the United States. Landscape Ecology. 28:1447-1463.

Abstract Index #: 134
HOUSING MARKET RESPONSE TO AMENITIES AND HAZARD: THE CASE OF LANDSLIDE EVENT IN WOOMYEON
NATURAL PARK, KOREA
Abstract System ID#: 1044
Individual Paper
KIM, Jeongseob [Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology] jskim14@unist.ac.kr, presenting author,
primary author
PARK, Junsung [Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology] joons91227@unist.ac.kr
YOON, Dong Keun [Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology] dkyoon@unist.ac.kr
Natural parks, such as beaches, rivers and mountains, provide amenities for the public, but residents near natural
parks could be more vulnerable to natural disasters like floods, tsunamis and landslides (Bin et al., 2008, Smith,
2013; Highfield et al., 2014). Many of natural parks in urban area in South Korea consist of mountains and
forests, and they are the places of local residents for their leisure and recreation activities such as climbing, hiking
and walking. Further, as natural parks furnish fresh air and a fine view, households are likely to live close to a
natural park to enjoy the amenities with paying premium on housing value. However, mountains themselves
have a hazard of landslide when the slopes of the mountains are poorly managed and the ground has weakened
due to a heavy rain (Hewitt, 2014). Thus, the risk of landslide could be negatively capitalized into the property
values.
A growing body of research has applied hedonic price models to identify factors affect property values, but less is
known regarding the effect of hazards of natural disasters on property values in the context of landslide. Also, the
trade-off between amenities and hazard effect of mountains on property values is not addressed well. Therefore,
this study aims to analyze the effects of mountains as both amenity and hazard factors on property values before
and after a landslide event. Specifically, three research questions are addressed.
1.
2.
3.

What is the effect of amenity and hazard of mountains on nearby home values?
Is the negative effect of the hazard strengthened after a catastrophic landslide event?
Does the negative effect of the hazard continue in the long-term after the restoration of the landslide?

In order to answer these questions, this study analyzes the housing market near Woomyeon Natural Park in Seoul
from 2008 to 2014 using a hedonic price model. A landslide of Woomyeon mountain in July 2011 derived from a
heavy rain resulted in property damage with more than 16 billion won, 18 deaths and 21 injuries, which was one
of the largest natural disasters in Seoul since 2000 (Seoul Metropolitan Government, 2014). To account for the
effect of the landslide event, this study analyzes three regression models: (1) before the landslide period (January
2008 – July 2011), (2) after the landslide period-short term effect (August 2011-July2012), and (3) after the
restoration of the landslide period-long term effect (August 2012-July2014). Further, a difference-in-difference
approach is applied to examine the effect of amenities and hazard on property values over the entire period.
Housing sale data from the Korea Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport, and other property and
locational characteristics are utilized to construct the hedonic price model.

This study will provide the systematic analysis of the role of natural parks in housing markets as amenities and a
hazard, thus filling the knowledge gaps in disaster management planning and housing studies. Further,
understanding the trade-off between amenities and hazard in property values will help governments and
planners develop safe and pleasant comminuty.
References
 Bin, O., Crawford, T. W., Kruse, J. B., & Landry, C. E. (2008). Viewscapes and Flood Hazard: Coastal
Housing Market Response to Amenities and Risk. Land Economics, 84(3), 434-448.
 Hewitt, K. (2014). Regions of risk: A geographical introduction to disasters. New York, NY: Routledge.
 Highfield, W. E., Peacock, W. G., & Van Zandt, S. (2014). Mitigation Planning: Why Hazard Exposure,
Structural vulnerability, and Social Vulnerability Matter. Journal of Planning Education and Research,
34(3), 287-300.
 Seoul Metropolitan Government (2014). Investigation of the Cause of the Landslide of Woomyeon
Natural Park. Seoul, Korea.
 Smith, K. (2013). environment hazards: assessing risk and reducing disaster. New York, NY: Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 135
PLANNER AND PUBLIC OFFICIAL PERSPECTIVES ON environmentLY SUSTAINABLE RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENT
Abstract System ID#: 1060
Individual Paper
GOCMEN, Asli [University of Wisconsin - Madison] gocmen@wisc.edu
Throughout the United States, local  land_use decisions are made primarily by public officials (i.e., plan
commissioners), who often lack training, expertise, and professional experience in  land_use planning. Plan
commissioners’ decisions significantly impact the character of their comminuty for decades to come. While
they may value environment sustainability, plan commissioners often approve residential developments that
negatively impact the natural environment more so than alternative designs might. Local planning staff, who
provide recommendations to the plan commissions, have great opportunities to influence decisions and the
implementation of environmently sustainable residential development practices. Yet, empirical work
examining both planner and plan commissioner perspectives on environmently sustainable residential
development does not exist, even though the perspectives of planners or plan commissioners on different
residential development patterns and on environment  impact of residential development have been studied
by several scholars (Bowman et al., 2012; Crick and Prokopy, 2009; Kaplan et al., 2008; Ryan, 2006). This paper
aims to help fill that gap in the literature.
I present findings from a study conducted in Waukesha County, located in southeastern Wisconsin. In 2013, we
interviewed 27 municipal and county planning staff and 31 plan commissioners on their perspectives and
practices concerning alternative forms of residential development to conventional low-density, large lot, land
use-separated, and automobile-dependent residential developments. We also asked these professionals about
their concern for the environment and the importance of environment sustainability for themselves.
The preliminary findings suggest that in general planners and plan commissioners have limited understanding of
how various site features in a residential development and how alternative development patterns impact the
natural environment. They also have limited knowledge of strategies that would promote environmently
sensitive and sustainable residential development: around a quarter of the planners and plan commissioners
interviewed could not provide any strategy apart from provision of open space in a particular development. The
study finds that the most common residential development type implemented as an alternative to low-density,
automobile-dependent conventional development is conservation subdivision design, which clusters residences
in smaller lots in order to protect subdivision land in shared open spaces. Yet, the comminuty differ
significantly in their implementation of the design, and the planners and the plan commissioners differ in their
understanding and assessment of the potential benefits of the design. According to the study, when compared

to plan commissioners, planners are better able to articulate residential development that would be more
environmentally sensitive and sustainable. Moreover, staff with formal planning training appear to value
independency from the automobile more so than others in promoting environmently sustainable residential
development.
References
 Bowman, T., Thompson, J., and Tyndall, J. 2012. Resident, developer, and city staff perceptions of LID
and CSD subdivision design approaches. Landscape and urban_planning. 107:43–54
 Crick, J. and Prokopy, L. S. 2009. Prevalence of conservation design in an agriculture-dominated
landscape: the case of Northern Indiana. environment Management. 43:1048–1060.
 Kaplan, R., Kaplan, S., and Austin, M. E. 2008. Factors shaping local  land_use decisions: Citizen planners’
perceptions and challenges. Environment and Behavior. 40(1): 46-71.
 Ryan, R. L. 2006. Comparing the attitudes of local residents, planners, and developers about preserving
rural character in New England. Landscape and urban_planning 75(1–2):5–22.

Abstract Index #: 136
PUBLIC RISK PERCEPTION AND CLIMATE CHANGE: FACTORS AFFECTING RESIDENT PERCEPTIONS AND
ATTITUDES TOWARDS SEA LEVEL RISE
Abstract System ID#: 1072
Individual Paper
GOMAA, Mohammed [University of Florida] gomaa.13@ufl.edu, presenting author, primary author
PENG, Zhongren [University of Florida] zpeng@dcp.ufl.edu
Public risk perception is one of the key components of the policy making process. It has the capabilities to
support or constrain adaptation actions to address any particular risks. Perceptions of the risks of sea level rise
greatly influence public opinion on sea level rise adaptation policy. Some studies revealed that public risks are
influenced not only by scientific and technical descriptions of risk, but also other social factors including personal
experience, affect and emotion, trust, and values (Slovic, 2000; Dessai et al., 2004). This study addresses the
question of how local residents respond to potential inundation due to sea level rise, investigating the main
factors affecting their behaviors and attitudes.
To achieve this goal, a scenario-involved survey method identifies several crucial findings related to residents’
attitudes towards future inundation. Data has been collected through a state preference survey for coastal
households in Panama City, Florida. The analysis then included the following; descriptive statistics on adaptation
behavior, cross tabulation to examine how responses to survey questions related to attitudinal and demographic
characteristics, and multiple regression analysis to determine which factors affecting the residents’ responses.
Based on the initial research findings, the majority of respondents (60%) believes that sea level rise exists.
However, a vast number of respondents would be unwilling to relocate even if their primary residence is likely to
be permanently inundated due to rising sea level. Respondents’ decisions to relocate are significantly associated
with factors like age, household income, race, and attitudes towards natural hazards. These findings may help
coastal comminuty shape their policy, raise public awareness about sea level rise, and develop adaptive
strategies and other resilient plans.
References
 Dessai, S., Adger, W. N., Hulme, M., Turnpenny, J., K ¨ohler, J., & Warren, R. (2004). Defining and
experiencing dangerous climate change. Climatic Change, 64(1–2), 15
 Harvatt, J., Petts, J., & Chilvers, J. (2010). Understanding householder responses to natural hazards:
flooding and sea‐level rise comparisons. Journal of Risk Research, 14(1), 63-83
 Slovic, P. (2000). The Perception of Risk. London: Earthscan
 Slovic, P., Finucane, M. L., Peters, E., & MacGregor, D. G. (2004). Risk as analysis and risk as feelings:
Some thoughts about affect, reason, risk, and rationality. Risk Analysis, 24(2), 311-322



Climate Central (2013). Florida and the surging sea. A vulnerability assessment with projections for sea
level rise and coastal flood risk

Abstract Index #: 137
USING ECONOMETRIC MODELS TO IDENTIFY THE TIPPING POINTS OF DIFFERENT SEA LEVEL RISE ADAPTATION
STRATEGIES
Abstract System ID#: 1078
Poster
GOMAA, Mohammed [University of Florida] gomaa.13@ufl.edu, presenting author, primary author
PENG, Zhongren [University of Florida] zpeng@dcp.ufl.edu
Sea level is expected to rise steadily though slowly in the foreseeable future. A direct consequence of sea level
rise is the inundation and flooding, inflicting considerable economic and ecological damages. A challenge for all
coastal area governments and state and national politicians is to decide on an appropriate adaptation strategy to
mitigate the damages and when to implement it, and more importantly on how to rally public support for the
new adaptation strategy.
The key concept in this study is the tipping point defined as the delay time when a new adaptation strategy is just
as effective as the current adaptation strategy. The effectiveness of a new adaptation is measured by the net
benefit defined as the difference between the damages mitigated by the new adaptation and the damages
mitigated by the current adaptation minus the implementation cost of the new adaptation.
Quantitative methods will be used to analyze and measure economic, social, and ecological  impact of sea level
rise scenarios. Assessment includes impact analysis, scenario design, and benefit-cost analysis. Economic values
to evaluate benefits and costs will be drawn from the literature.
The findings will be applied to compare and identify optimal (or “second-best” – given existing market
distortions) adaptation strategies based on a comprehensive economic analysis, with input from secondary data
sources - publicly available data and previous research findings. The tipping point can be used as an effective
decision making method to educate the public on a complicated policy matter.
References
 Gladwell, M (2000). The Tipping Point: How Little Things can Make a Big Difference. Back Bay Books,
Boston, MA
 Lu, Qing-Chang and Zhong-Ren Peng (2012). Economic Analysis of Sea-Level Rise  impact and Adaptation
Strategies in Transportation. Transportation Research Record: Journal of Transportation Research Board,
No. 2273, pp. 54-61
 Russill, Chris and Zoe Nyssa (2009). The tipping point trend in climate change communication. Global
Environmental Change 19 (2009) 336 – 344

Abstract Index #: 138
SOCIO-ECOLOGICAL system: CROSSING DISCIPLINARY BOUNDARIES IN environment PLANNING WITH
CASES FROM CORAL REEF comminuty IN INDONESIA AND MALAYSIA
Abstract System ID#: 1080
Individual Paper
DUNNING, Kelly Heber [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] k_heber1@mit.edu
Environmental planners and policy-makers and the comminuty they serve face challenges in managing shared
or “common pool” resources. Coastal resources present a management dilemma, since they are often overexploited, yet it is nearly impossible to exclude people from their use. In heavily urbanized coastal area, experts
are increasingly operationalizing natural resource management problems as “socio-ecological system” (Ostrom

1990, Armitage et al. 2010). This theoretical tool views coastal environments as linked to the local social system
(culture, values, attitudes, beliefs) and economic system (markets, eco tourism). Any management question
must examine all three system and their interconnectedness (Berkes 2004). It is estimated that 120 million
Southeast Asians depend directly on reefs for livelihoods. Because of increased awareness of the enormous value
of coral reef ecosystems, regional governments are trying to improve the way that comminuty plan and manage
their reefs by creating and fostering stronger reef management institutions, defined as the rules and
organizations that determine resource use (Cinner et al. 2009). Institutions require specific and unique building
blocks (Agrawal and Gibson 1999). This research draws on theory to specify these building blocks as they pertain
to coral reef comminuty. It then links institutional traits with ecological system health.
Co-management institutional frameworks, where power is shared between the local resource users and national
government, allow resource users to take primary responsibility for day-to-day management and is hypothesized
to enhance ecological health. My research compares 6 cases of co-managed reefs, 3 Indonesian villages and 3
Malaysian villages, in order to determine what institutional frameworks tend to result in healthy reefs. These
villages are all recovering from decades of blast fishing, where dynamite was a common route to catching fish. I
measure 7 specific components of institutions using qualitative interviews and quantitative surveys. I measure
ecosystem health with established biophysical ecological survey methods on the village reefs.
I find that participatory institutions do not necessarily lead to healthier reefs, a surprising finding. I find that
deliberate slow growth, often imposed from the top down by respected local elites is one of the strongest
predictors of healthy reefs. I find that in some cases, social system are resilient (able to withstand shocks) and
display evidence of participatory risk management (such as insurance schemes) but ecological system are not
always equally resilient. Overall this means that design for reef management needs to take into account the
history of a socio-ecological system, the culture and values of the local people, as well as the unique ecological
drivers of change. One size fits all management schemes, even well intentioned ones that stipulate participatory
processes and equity, are to be viewed with caution.
References
 Agrawal, A., & Gibson, C. C. (1999). Enchantment and disenchantment: the role of community in natural
resource conservation. World development, 27(4), 629-649.
 Armitage, D., Berkes, F., & Doubleday, N. (Eds.). (2010). Adaptive co-management: collaboration,
learning, and multi-level governance. UBC Press.
 Berkes, F. (2004). Rethinking community‐based conservation. Conservation biology, 18(3), 621-630.
 Cinner, J. E., Wamukota, A., Randriamahazo, H., & Rabearisoa, A. (2009). Toward institutions for
community-based management of inshore marine resources in the Western Indian Ocean. Marine
Policy, 33(3), 489-496.
 Ostrom, E. (1990). Governing the commons: The evolution of institutions for collective action.
Cambridge university press.

Abstract Index #: 139
EQUITY AND ADAPTATION PLANNING: DO WE KNOW WHAT WE MEAN?
Abstract System ID#: 1103
Poster
HEIMAN, Kelly [University of Kansas] keheiman@ku.edu, presenting author, primary author
LYLES, Ward [University of Kansas] wardlyles@ku.edu
Although initially lagging behind policy for greenhouse gas emission reduction, policy for climate change
adaptation is becoming more common in our planning documents (Bierbaum, 2013, Wheeler, 2009). The
standard narrative of climate change adaptation focuses on human resiliency in the face of increased weather
events, variations in temperature and precipitation, and the  impact of sea level rise. However, climate change
events will not affect all populations equally, and there are different narratives of “resiliency,” “vulnerability” and
“justice” that planners must consider as they begin implementing climate adaptation policy (Bulkeley, 2013).

This research will utilize tools and theories from the fields of both urban_planning and geography to analyze how
equity is addressed in US municipal climate adaptation plans.
This poster explores the role that vulnerability and equity considerations play in the municipal planning process,
analyzing how these terms manifest themselves in climate adaptation plans from 11 city in the United States. It
inquires: How are equity and justice defined, and what (or who) is missing from these definitions? Why do certain
communities consider vulnerability and equity more than others?
This research employs a mixed-method approach combining both quantitative analysis of data derived from plancoding analysis and a qualitative assessment of specific case-study city. The quantitative analysis follows the
established guidelines of plan quality literature and content analysis to study municipal climate change
adaptation plans in the United States (Lyles and Stevens, 2014). This method replicates items used in local hazard
mitigation plan quality research combined with specific language focused on social equity, environment justice
and vulnerable populations. The qualitative analysis uses interviews and case studies to further analyze the
creation and implementation of equity-related aspects of the plans, and shed light on how planners contextualize
and prioritize equity considerations. This analysis will further utilize a constructivist approach, questioning both
the power dynamics and social implications of our current climate adaptation planning methods.
Our findings indicate that the current iterations of equity in our climate adaptation plans do not adequately
address the true extent of vulnerability to climate change  impact that some comminuty will feel. Within our
research, it is evident that the treatment of equity included in these climate adaptation plans is minimal and
vague. These findings have implications for policy, offering planners the potential to find more equitable means
of adapting to climate change.
References
 Bierbaum, R., et al. (2013). “A comprehensive review of climate adaptation I the United States: more
than before, but less than needed” Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change 18: 361-406.
 Bulkeley, H., et al. (2013). “Climate justice and global city: Mapping the emerging discourses” Global
Environmental Change 23:5. 914-925.
 Lyles, W., & Stevens, M. (2014). Plan Quality Evaluation 1994–2012 Growth and Contributions,
Limitations, and New Directions. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 0739456X14549752.
 Pettenger, M. E. (2007). The social construction of climate change: Power, knowledge, norms,
discourses. Aldershot, Hampshire, England: Ashgate.
 Wheeler, S., J Randolph, and J.B. London. (2009). “Planning and climate change: an emerging research
agenda.” Progress in Planning 72:4, 210-222.

Abstract Index #: 140
URBAN DENSITY AND WATER CONSUMPTION
Abstract System ID#: 1110
Individual Paper
HILTON, Holly [University of Utah] hollyjanehilton@gmail.com
Water availability is an increasingly important factor in planning, especially in the Western United States. This
dissertation examines how the built environment, specifically  land_use density at the county level for urban
counties,  impact water consumption per capita. As city increase  land_use density, water consumption per
capita should decrease. Controlling for climate, water pricing, state water polices and sociodemographic
variables, water consumption per capita will be higher in sprawling urban counties than in higher density
compact urban counties.
Increases in sprawl among highly concentrated and growing populations can easily outstrip local water resources.
Larger single family homes with large lot sizes increase water demand, further exhausting the resource. Sprawling
development increases the geographical area served by public water system. Distributing water resources across

vast distances increases inefficiencies in these system. For example, in the United States an estimated one
trillion gallons of water are lost each year to broken pipes and infrastructure damage (U.S. EPA, 2011).
This is a longitudinal study using fixed effects regression to measure changes in water consumption per capita
associated with changes in  land_use density between the years of 1995 and 2010. US Geological Survey data for
domestic consumptive use between the years of 1995 and 2010 has been compiled to use in conjunction with
Reid Ewing et al Sprawl Index to examine the impact the built environment has had on water consumption per
capita over a fifteen year period. It has been suggested that increases in density decreases water consumption
per capita, this study intends to validate this hypothesis through data and statistical analysis. Results from this
study will help to inform the benefits of density over sprawl when planning in area of water scarcity.
References
 Ewing, R. , Pendall, R., & Chen, D. Measuring sprawl and its transportation  impact. Transportation
Research Record, 01831(03-4195), 175-183.
 Burchell, R. W. & Listokin, D. (1995) Land, infrastructure, housing costs, and fiscal  impact associated
with growth: The literature on the  impact of traditional versus managed growth. TCRB Report – The
Costs of Sprawl Revisited page 47
 Walton, B. (2010, April 20). The price of water: a comparison of water rates, usage in 30 us city.
Retrieved from http://www.circleofblue.org/waternews/2010/world/the-price-of-water-a-comparisonof-water-rates-usage-in-30-u-s-cities/
 Baumann, D., Boland, J., & Hanemann, W.M. (1998). Urban water demand management and planning.
McGraw-Hill.
 US environment Protection Agency, Protecting Water Resources with Higher Density Development

Abstract Index #: 141
PLANNING FOR A NEW URBAN environment HISTORY OF MEGAREGIONS
Abstract System ID#: 1118
Individual Paper
CONNOLLY, James [Northeastern University] j.connolly@neu.edu
The intensification of the interplay between space and place within and across regions has been described as a
process that leads to urbanizing megaregions throughout the world. Recognized in countries with and without
classical industrial histories on all of the inhabited continents, urbanizing megaregions are characterized by a
multi-nodal mosaic of developed and undeveloped land that dissolves traditional boundaries between city,
regions, suburbs, and rural area. As a result, these conurbations containing between 40 and 120 million people
raise pressing governance challenges, not the least of which are concerned with managing environment
impacts (Harrison and Hoyler 2014).
Studies of the environment  impact of urbanizing megaregions thus far have generally forwarded the
assumption that the shift toward megaregional economies and infrastructure has an environment benefit (see
RPA 2007; Ross 2009). This assumption results from the focus within the planning and policy literature on “clean
advanced service” industrial growth and the development of large scale transit system, usually in the form of
high-speed rail. Wheeler (2015) specifically challenged this approach by identifying five reasons why our
understanding of environment  impact from megaregional urbanization cannot fall into the easy narrative of a
“clean industry” shift associated with the new global economy of advanced service growth.
Building on the effort to better understand the environment planning challenges of urbanizing megaregions, I
argue for the need to view the environment  impact as qualitatively different than those that shaped the
environmental history of regions that grew out the industrial era expansion of city. The environment  impact
of urbanizing megaregions are far more systemic. I use a quantitative spatial analysis of commuting, energy use
and spatial segregation to measure these systemic effects of urbanizing megaregions in the United States and
specifically describe the potential  impact on processes of biogeochemistry. I draw on these findings to describe

the challenges that the new environment history of megaregions (which is taking shape now) will present for
the existing practice or urban environment planning.
References
 Harrison J, Hoyler M (2014) Governing the new metropolis. Urban Studies. 0042098013500699.
 Ross C (2009) Megaregions: Planning for Global Competitiveness. Washington DC: Island Press.
 RPA, Regional Plan Association (2007) Northeast megaregion 2050: a common future. In. Regional Plan
Association, New York
 Wheeler, S. M. (2015). Five reasons why megaregional planning works against sustainability.
Megaregions: Globalization’s New Urban Form, 97-118.
 Wheeler S (2007) Regions, Megaregions, and Sustainability. Regional Studies, 43(6): 863-876.

Abstract Index #: 142
A STUDY ON THE environment IMPACT OF LIFTING GREENBELTS: KOREAN CASE
Abstract System ID#: 1121
Poster
SONG, Seul Ki [Pusan National University] ssgc3001@naver.com, presenting author, primary author
BAE, Kyungwan [Pusan National University] mwkw77@naver.com
LEE, Dalbyul [Dongeui University] dalbyul25@nate.com
JUNG, Juchul [Pusan National University] jcjung@pusan.ac.kr
Principles of the sustainable city were introduced to the basis of modern planning in the late 20th century to
solve environment problems of rapid industrialization and urbanization. These new principles brought a change
of modern planning paradigm such as smart growth, compact city and new urbanism.
South Korea introduced the greenbelt policy in the 1970s to prevent urban sprawl and protect environment
through conservation of suburban green area. The policy of greenbelt has been utilized as a tool of modern
planning paradigm. Despite its positive  impact, the government has relaxed regulations on greenbelts since early
2000s. In June 2014, the Korean government announced excessive deregulation of the greenbelt policy. Due to it,
an acceleration of developments on greenbelts has been anticipated. Some of academics and civic groups are
criticizing an attitude of the Korean government promoting policy without consideration to which degree
environmental qualities worsen owing to lifting the greenbelt policy.
To identify this problem, many studies have been performed in Korea. Major preceding studies display that lifting
greenbelts cause urban sprawl and negative effects on environment. These studies adopt generally qualitative
assessment. However, it has been limited to get quantitative data that people require. To overcome limitations,
this study implements an empirical analysis to confirm quantitative degrees of environment improvement and
deterioration by lifting greenbelts.
This study is based three research questions. First, which degree greenbelts have performed original functions.
Second, which degree lifting greenbelts aggravates local environment quality for the observed period. Last,
which degree environment qualities vary with lifting rate and the types of developments built after the lifting of
greenbelts. Firstly, I hypothesize that greenbelts are effective in improving the quality of the local environment
and preventing deterioration of the local environment. Second, the environment quality of city where
greenbelts were lifted will deteriorate rapidly in comparison to those that retained their greenbelts. Third, the
deterioration of the local environment will differ according to lifting rate and the types of developments built
after the lifting of greenbelts.
To verify these, at first, the definition of environment is defined to air quality measured by NO2 and SO2 and
water quality measured by COD and BOD. This analysis deals with 232 city all over the country. Of these, 82
cities are included in the experiment group, which consists of city that experience policy lifting greenbelts. The
remaining 150 city are in the control group; of these, 129 city do not have designated greenbelts and 21 city

have kept their greenbelts. The time scope of this study is from 1995 to 2010, as the deregulation of greenbelt
policy began in 2000. To identify the time variance of environment qualities, longitudinal data analysis was
utilized. There are many factors affecting environment quality except greenbelt policy. This method can
effectively evaluate situations where environment indicators have changed rapidly before the lifting of
greenbelts. It is also suitable for comparisons within groups as well as between groups.
The findings of this study indicate the designation of greenbelts is effective to improve degrees of NO2, BOD and
COD. Lifting greenbelts has aggravated all indicators than before. In addition, the greater the lifting rate, the
greater the deterioration of SO2. Finally, a higher rate of housing development in lifted area correlates with a
higher rate of deterioration of SO2 and COD compared to other development types. These findings show that
decision makers should discourage the lifting of greenbelts and, if greenbelts must be lifted, be aware of the
effects of lifting rates and types of developments. For this, guidelines for adjustment of greenbelts should be
reformed including standards of lifting rate and development type.
References
 Dalbyul Lee, The impact of natural disasters on neighborhood change: longitudinal data analysis, Georgia
Institute of Technology doctoral dissertation, 2012
 EPA, Growing for Sustainable Future: Miami-Dade County Urban Development Boundary Assessement,
2012
 Judith D. Singer and John B. Willett, Applied Longitudinal Data Analysis-modeling change and event
occurrence, Oxford university press, 2003
 Jun Tu et al, , Impact of urban sprawl on water quality in eastern Massachusetts, USA, Environ Manage,
Vol 40, 2007, pp. 183-200
 Koen De Ridder et al, Simulating the impact of urban sprawl on air quality and population exposure in
the German Ruhr area, Part Ⅰ: Reproducing the base state, Atmospheric Environment, vol .42 2008, pp.
7059~7069

Abstract Index #: 143
COLLABORATION IN AGRICULTURAL WATERSHEDS: BALANCING FARMER-LED WITH AGENCY-APPROVED
Abstract System ID#: 1131
Pre-organized Session: Collaborative Challenges on Working Landscapes
GENSKOW, Kenneth [University of Wisconsin-Madison] kgenskow@wisc.edu
Nutrients and associated contaminants running off of agricultural lands degrade and threaten water quality and
aquatic ecosystems across much of the United States as well as internationally (e.g., USGS 2010). Yet policy and
plans supporting conservation practices to reduce agricultural runoff rely primarily on incentivized voluntary
actions by farmers. State, federal, and local agencies address these challenges at multiple scales by modeling the
flows and sources of nutrients and related contaminants and by identifying critical management practices (often
in targeted area) for farmers to adopt (Genskow and Wood 2009). While the importance of engaging farmers to
accomplish water quality goals is widely recognized, implementing plans on working landscapes remains very
challenging. As noted by noted in Morton and Brown (2011, p 34), for many farmers, “[t]he assessment
measures are not understood, the remediation plan does not feel local, and the prescribed strategies for water
improvement are someone else’s, not the persons whose land management practices are being targeted.”
Some Midwestern watersheds are gaining experience with a collaborative watershed council model that relies on
farmer leadership in identifying and addressing these water quality issues. This farmer-led model is also driven by
farmer selected or defined performance measures and low-cost, locally determined incentives. Confidentially
comparing their individual performance measure scores (e.g., a soil health index value) with others in the
watersheds (without disclosing identities) has been changing norms around conservation behaviors (Morton and
Brown 2011).

While highly promising, the approach poses institutional challenges for regulatory agencies and watershed
planners. Namely, challenges include the pace of change, the necessity of “allowing” farmers to determine
performance measures, and the need to link changes on the landscape to reductions in nutrient loads and
improvements in water quality. Some level of initial catalyst and coordination is necessary to start a farmer-led
watershed council, but how can agencies “step back” to let the process unfold while justifying funds for
supporting an effort? The challenges become more pronounced if downstream stakeholders call for strong and
immediate action.
This paper will explore these issues through the emerging examples of farmer-led watershed councils in westcentral Wisconsin. Based on a highly successful model in Iowa (see Morton and Brown 2011, chapter 15),
Wisconsin’s four councils began less than three years ago and have already made great strides. Preliminary
analysis is based on interviews with key participants and with conservation and agency stakeholders observing
from a distance with varying degrees of skeptical optimism. The paper will highlight challenges, limitations, and
opportunities of this model.
References
 Genskow, K. and D. Wood. 2009. Measurement, Learning, and Adaptation in Planning and Implementing
Voluntary Non-point Source Watershed program. Journal of Planning Literature. 24(2):137-154.
 Morton, L. Wright and S. Brown (eds.). 2011. Pathways for Getting Better Water Quality: The Citizen
Effect. Springer: New York.
 USGS. 2010. The quality of our Nation’s waters—Nutrients in the Nation’s streams and groundwater,
1992–2004: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1350. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior.

Abstract Index #: 144
THE PRICE PREMIUM OF LOTS IN CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS USING SPATIAL ECONOMETRIC MODELS
Abstract System ID#: 1125
Individual Paper
MOHAMED, Rayman [Wayne State University] ar7347@wayne.edu
There continues to be a growing literature that assesses the benefits of conservation subdivisions (see, e.g.,
Arendt 1999, Carter 2009, Göçmen 2014). In a previous paper (Mohamed 2006), I examined 184 lots to assess
one element of the discussions about conservation subdivisions: the price premium of lots in these
developments. In this paper, I revisit those analyses by taking account of spatial autocorrelation: I hypothesize
that lots located near to each other have a spatial spillover effect that should be accounted for.
Thus, while my 2006 analyses were restricted to ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions, in these analyses I use
spatial econometric models, specifically, a spatial autoregressive (SAR) model, which considers spatial
dependence to be a consequence of omitted variables (i.e., a structural process) and a spatial error model (SEM),
which assumes spatially structured random effects in the unobserved error terms (see LeSage and Pace 2009 for
a detailed discussion of the SAR and SEM models). I assume a queen contiguity weight matrix to model the spatial
relationship between lots, where neighboring lots are identified based on a shared border. I used a shared
border to define neighboring lots because I am interested in the spillover effects of one lot on another. Both
models confirm the spatial spillover effect, that is, the value of a lot, particularly a lot in a conservation
subdivision, strengthens the value of neighboring lots in the subdivision.
The results differ in magnitude from the OLS models examined in 2006. While in Mohamed (2006), I found that
lots in conservation subdivisions carried a premium of about 13% over other lots, this research finds a smaller
effect in both of the spatial models examined, about 9 percent. According to the SAR model, the direct effect of a
lot in a conservation subdivision is to add about 5 percent to the value of the lot. The indirect, spillover effect of
other lots in the conservation subdivision is about 3 percent. (Spatial error models cannot be disaggregated into
direct and indirect effects.) Similarly, as lot sizes increase, the value of land falls, but again the magnitude of the
decrease is smaller when compared to the OLS analyses in 2006. Some of the other location variables that were

significant in the 2006 analyses are not significant in these analyses, namely, distance to the coast and distance to
scenic districts.
Overall, these analyses point to the utility of using spatial spillover models: Not taking account of spatial spillover
effects may overstate the direct price premium for lots in conservation subdivisions. More importantly, it is the
collection of lots in conservation subdivisions that plays a role in determining the value of these lots, rather than
the lot itself.
References
 Arendt, R. G. (1999). Growing Greener: Putting Conservation into Local Plans and Ordinances.
Washington, DC, Island Press.
 Carter, T. (2009). "Developing conservation subdivisions: Ecological constraints, regulatory barriers, and
market incentives", Landscape and urban_planning 92(2): 117-124.
 Göçmen, Z. A. (2014). "Assessing the environment Merits of Conservation Subdivision Design", Journal
of Planning Education and Research 34(2): 203-220.
 LeSage, J. P. and R. K. Pace (2009). An Introduction to Spatial Econometrics. London, ChapmanHall/CRC
Press.
 Mohamed, R. (2006). "The Psychology of Residential Developers: Lessons from Behavioral Economics
and Additional Explanations for Satisficing", Journal of Planning Education and Research 26(1): 28-37.

Abstract Index #: 145
SHARING THE LOAD: AN EXPLORATION OF THE PUBLIC'S ROLE IN SUSTAINABILITY PLAN IMPLEMENTATION
Abstract System ID#: 1129
Individual Paper
KINZER, Kirsten [University of Pennsylvania] kkinzer@design.upenn.edu
Plan implementation continues to be a vexing problem for both practitioners and researchers (Laurien et al.
2010, Berke et al. 2006, Brody and Highfield 2005). And yet, empirical research provides little guidance to
practitioners hoping to move from an approved plan to action. One common implementation technique is to
create a citizen advisory committee (CAC) specifically focused on realizing a plan (Williamson and Fung 2005).
Examples of CACs exist in most, if not all, American city—the Salt Lake City Redevelopment Advisory
Committee, the Washington DC Bicycle Advisory Council, and the San Diego Community Forest Advisory Board—
but such public participation in plan implementation has largely been ignored by urban and environment
planning researchers. This paper evaluates the role and impact of CACs in plan implementation in moderate and
large American city with community-wide sustainability plans. Additionally, the study identifies ways in which
sustainability planners can actively share responsibility for implementation with a CAC.
The data source for this paper is 36 in-depth qualitative interviews with sustainability planners in American city
with a population over 100,000 and an adopted community-wide sustainability plan. Each interview covered the
history of sustainability planning in the city, early implementation progress, the CAC’s role in planning and in
early implementation, and the sustainability planner’s relationship to the committee. The interview sample is
drawn from a larger national scan of sustainability planning in 76 city. In 11 of the interviewed comminuty, the
CAC was involved in planning only and in 25 of the interviewed comminuty, the CAC was involved in planning
and implementation.
The paper identifies the area that are the most problematic for sustainability plan implementation in the 36
interviewed comminuty and therefore, where CAC engagement could have the largest benefit. Next, CAC roles
in plan implementation are analyzed and compared to the relative significance of the problems that the CACs
addressed. Finally, to determine if the implementation CACs’ work has a measurable impact, the speed of
implementation in the 25 city that formed a CAC and the 11 that did not is assessed. This analysis shows that
public participation can help move implementation past some, but not all, implementation barriers. The paper

concludes with a discussion of the sustainability planner’s role in facilitating substantive work by the CAC that can
impact the most common implementation barriers.
The 36 CACs demonstrate that there is an important role for citizen advisory committees in sustainability plan
implementation, but not every CAC had the same impact. The choices made by sustainability planners and their
superiors in structuring the CAC had a major effect on how much the CAC was able to contribute. Several
recommendations for practice can be extrapolated from the range of approaches and  impact that CACs have
had in different comminuty. The most basic and most important recommendation is simply to form an
implementation CAC. Some sustainability planners who did not take this step saw the time that it takes to
manage a citizen committee as simply time taken away from moving forward with the work outlined in the
sustainability plan. But as this analysis shows, the time invested in a CAC actually expands the sustainability
planner’s capacity to implement the plan. After forming a CAC, the sustainability planner must direct the group’s
energy to fully leverage their potential to support implementation. For example, CACs in the study revised the
city’s building code to encourage green building practices, engaged in grassroots advocacy to support a plastic
bag ban, and provided direct funding for downtown bike racks. In each case, there is an ongoing role for the
sustainability planner in facilitating and sustaining the CACs work.
References
 Laurian, Lucie, Jan Crawford, Maxine Day, Peter Kouwenhoven, Greg Mason, Neil Ericksen, and Lee
Beattie. 2010. Evaluating the Outcomes of Plans: Theory, practice and methodology. Environment and
Planning B: Planning and Design. 37(4), 740-757.
 Berke, Philip, Michael Backhurst, Maxine Day, Neil Erickson, Lucie Laurian, Jan Crawford. 2006. What
Makes Plan Implementation Successful? An evaluation of local plans and implementation practices in
New Zealand. Environment & Planning B: Planning & Design 33 (4), 581-600.
 Brody, S. D., and Highfield, W. 2005. Does Planning Work? Testing the implementation of local
environmental planning in Florida. Journal of the American Planning Association. 71(2), 159-175.
 Williamson, Abby and Archon Fung. (2005). Mapping Public Deliberation. Menlo Park: William and Flora
Hewlett Foundation.

Abstract Index #: 146
A STUDY ON THE PUBLIC’S PERCEPTIONS TOWARDS SEA LEVEL RISE AND ADAPTATION PLANNING BASED ON
SOCIAL MEDIA DATA
Abstract System ID#: 1136
Individual Paper
DENG, Yujun [University of Florida] dengyujun11@ufl.edu, presenting author, primary author
PENG, Zhong-Ren [University of Florida] zpeng@ufl.edu
SONG, Jie [University of Florida] songjiescu@ufl.edu
Planners at coastal comminuty are aware of the  impact of sea level rise (SLR) and aware of the needs for taking
actions to mitigate the potential damages from coastal flooding. However, to gain support from residents and to
conduct effective adaptation planning, planners and decision makers must understand how the tourists, business
owners and local residents perceive climate change, SLR and adaptation planning, and how that perception
affects their behavior towards rising sea level and adaptation planning. Furthermore, planners need to know
what kind of information and in what delivery forms could be most effective in communicating with the public.
Given the importance of social media in our daily life (Conroy & Evans-Cowley, 2006; Evans-Cowley, 2010;
Schweitzer, 2014), this paper intends to address those major questions through the study of social media data.
Specifically, this paper intends to address the following questions: What is the general perception of local
residents and businesses towards climate change and sea level rise? What are their attitudes towards adaptation
planning as revealed in social media data? Most importantly, do the perceptions toward sea level rise and the
need for adaptation planning differ? In other words, do we have evidence from the social media data showing

that even though people may differ on the climate change issues, but do they agree on taking adaptation step to
adapt to coastal flooding, higher tides and intense hurricanes as a no-regret option?
The answers to these questions are crucial to planners and decision makers in communicating with the general
public about the  impact of sea level rise and gaining support for their adaptation planning efforts.
Most of our analysis is being conducted based on the Twitter platform. Since we focus our research on coastal
regions, we sampled recent tweets in Florida. For our case, several tools are being utilized to extract social media
data. Specifically, a social-media data mining tool, MassMine, is used to extract social-media content from
Twitter, Reddit, Tumblr (Beveridge and Van Horn, 2014).
We identified and browsed sea-level-rise-related topics within Twitter’s large collection of conversational data
using the topic modeling techniques to study the attitude and sentiment of coastal comminuty. Topic modeling
methods are also utilized to detect lower frequency topics which researchers may regard as important (Prier,
Smith, Giraud-Carrier, & Hanson, 2011). We applied Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) method to analyze phrases
and topics of comprehensive and selected datasets. Lastly, the spatial patterns of top topics as well as people’s
sentiment towards these topics are identified (Go, Huang, & Bhayani, 2009). Specifically we identified those
tweets with top topics related to sea level rise, select tweets with georeferenced information, i.e., longitude and
latitude and finally convert these tweets into points whose spatial patterns could be displayed using kernel
density function in ArcGIS (Tsou et al., 2013). By applying Moran’s I and G’s statistics the hot spots and
autocorrelation of these topics could be confirmed.
A preliminary sample of over 20,000 tweets has been collected in the state Florida by searching “flooding” on the
MassMine platform. By applying the LDA to identify related topics in the data, several top topics related to
flooding---i.e., “rain”, “worse”, and “beach”---were identified. In addition, improved LDA methods (deep learning
for “deeply hidden” patterns) were then applied; as a result, “sea level rise” was also found to be a related topic
with lower frequency. More data analysis and modeling are ongoing and the final results are expected to be out
by the end of May, 2015, and a formal paper will be ready well before ACSP conference in October, 2015.
References
 Evans-Cowley, J. S. (2010). Planning in the age of Facebook: the role of social networking in planning
processes. GeoJournal, 407-420.
 Schweitzer, Lisa (2014). Planning and Social Media: A Case Study of Public Transit and Stigma on Twitter,
Journal of the American Planning Association, 80:3, 218-238, DOI: 10.1080/01944363.2014.980439
 Conroy, M. M., & Evans-Cowley, J. (2006). E-participation in planning: an analysis of city adopting online citizen particilation tools. Environment and Planning, 371-384.
 Li, L., Goodchild, M. F., & Xu, B. (2013). Spatial, temporal, and socioeconomic patterns in the use of
Twitter and Flickr. Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 40(2), 61-77.
 Go, A., Huang, L., & Bhayani, R. (2009). Twitter sentiment analysis. Entropy, 17.

Abstract Index #: 147
MITIGATION PLANNING FOR NATECHS IN THE TOP 30 MOST POPULOUS US city: AN EXPLORATORY ANALYSIS
Abstract System ID#: 1162
Individual Paper
PATERSON, Robert [University of Texas at Austin] rgfp@austin.utexas.edu
Concerns over natural hazard triggered technological disasters (Natechs) has risen globally in the aftermath of
the Great East Japan (aka as the Tohoku Earthquake) Earthquake on March 11th 2011. The earthquake which
measured a 9.0 on the Richter scale, unleashed a series of tsunami waves that hit the east coast of Japan with
recorded crests at over 30 meters, in some cases, at landfall. Over 16,000 deaths were directly attributed to the
Tohoku earthquake and tsunami events, less clear for some time to come is the loss of life and suffering that will
stem from radioactive and hazardous chemical exposures that were triggered by the natural disaster events
(large scale hazardous chemical releases and fires also were triggered in Chiba and Sendai, Japan) (1, 2). While
Industrial facilities such as the Fukushima-one and Onagawa nuclear power plants have elaborate industrial

safety engineering program and protocols in place, these can and do fail when the their designed performance is
exceeded by a greater than anticipated external force, or when power supply, computer controls and human
error or neglect lead to system failures. Both seismic and tsunami cascading damages induced a system failure
that led to one of the worst nuclear disasters in Japanese and global history. And yet, while there is clear
evidence that globally, natural hazard disasters are on the rise, there has not been a strong response to address
the fact that greater frequencies of hazard events will in all likelihood lead to more chances of Natech events to
occur as well.(3)
Concerns over these events have lead to the creation of several international study commissions sponsored by
the UN, EU and OECD member countries (4). A number of Natech researchers over the last two decades who
have analyzed high visibility Natech events such as the Kocaeli, Turkey earthquake, the Northridge earthquakes
and Hurricane Katrina, have repeatedly warned that many major city in the world face extreme risk to life and
property because they are unaware, unprepared and have done little to reduce Natech risks (5). And while many
researchers have outlined ways to better reduce such risk through integration of hazard mitigation and  land_use
planning (among other measures), it remains unclear that any real headway has been accomplished in the US
despite the clear warnings from recent large Natech events.
This paper reports on a survey of Natech risk assessment and mitigation planning in the hazard mitigation plans
and comprehensive plans of the 30 most populous US city. Although the results are only to be generalized to
these populous US city, they suggest that much works remains to evaluate and plan for Natech risks. If we
assume our largest US city ought to be at the vanguard of protecting large urban populations from Natech risk,
then we have much to be worried about. Overall, while many natural hazards plans mention hazardous material
release concerns, vulnerability assessment of populations at risk from industrial facilities and hazard materials
storage and transmission lines is lacking. Moreover, very rarely does any comprehensive plan in the sample
address the possibility of reducing Natech risks through  land_use planning approaches. The paper concludes with
two examples of how comminuty could begin to better address such concerns from analyses in Seattle WA and
Corpus Christi, Texas using readily available government data sources and models.
References
 Norio, O., Ye, T., Kajitani, Y., Shi, P., Tatano, H. (2011). The 2011 eastern Japan great earthquake disaster:
Overview and comments. Int. J. Disaster Risk Sci. 2(1): 34-42
 Bird, W.A., and Grossman, E. (2011). Chemical aftermath: Contamination and cleanup following the
Tohoku Earthquake and tsunami. Focus. NIH.
 Petrova, E. G. and Krausmann, E.: Postface "From natural hazards to technological disasters", Nat.
Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 11, 3063-3065, doi:10.5194/nhess-11-3063-2011, 2011
 French Ministry of Ecology (2013). When natural and technological hazards collide: Overview of the
industrial accidents caused by the great Tohuku earthquake and tsunami. French Ministry of Ecology,
Sustainable Development and Energy. 1-110
 Krausmann, E. and Cruz, A.M. (2013) Impact of the 11 March 2011, Great East Japan Earthquake and
Tsunami on the Chemical Industry. Natural Hazards, 67, 811-828.

Abstract Index #: 148
PLANNING FOR CLEAN AIR IN CHINA'S MEGACITIES: LINKING URBAN STRUCTURE AND AIR POLLUTION IN
BEIJING
Abstract System ID#: 1169
Individual Paper
LI, Weifeng [The University of Hong Kong] wfli@hku.hk
While Beijing is not alone when it comes to smoke-filled skies, this city of more than 20 million people has come
to symbolize the environment cost of China's break-neck economic growth. Fine particulate matter (PM2.5)
pollution has been a heated topic for discussion that also leads to health concerns greatly. Health studies have
shown a significant association between exposure to fine particulates and adverse human health effects, such as

respiratory problems and cardiovascular diseases. The sources of PM2.5 could be from burning of coal and
biofuel, dust from roads, exhausted gases from vehicles and industrialization. Air quality varies in urban spaces
non-linearly and depends on multiple factors, such as meteorology, traffic volume, and  land_uses. It is of
significant importance to investigate the contributions of population density,  land_use, transportation system and
urban activities to the concentrations of PM2.5. The proposed research will also be one of the earliest
assessments, as known, of examining the spatial variation of the PM2.5 concentrations and exploring the  impact
from urban structure and activities in the Chinese context since the public release of real time PM2.5 data in
major Chinese city in 2013.
Most of currently reported models for linking the PM2.5 concentrations to  land_use and urban pattern, such as
the most commonly used  land_use Regression (LUR) Model in environment research, are global methods
without considering local variations, which might introduce significant biases into prediction results. In this paper,
a geographically weighted regression (GWR) model will be developed to examine the  impact of urban structure
and activities on PM2.5 concentrations, in the Beijing metropolitan area. It aims to make contributions to
development and new advances in bridging the LUR and GWR modeling, including expanding the scope of the
predictor variables, new GIS approaches, and spatio-temporal considerations.
This research applies the GWR model to assess the exposure to fine particles in Beijing, and to understand the
impacts from vegetation coverage, population density,  land_use pattern, transportation network as well as human
activities, e.g., catering services. It makes use of the data collected from around 100 air quality monitoring
stations in the Beijing metropolitan area between January and December 2014. Combined with the road
networks, demographics, distribution of catering services and  land_use map, the GWR model is built to analyze
the contributions of those factors to the concentrations of PM2.5. By doing this, we will help policy makers
identify the priority area and design better plan for pollution controls. Of course, this research could also serve
as the important inputs to the health effects study of long-term exposure to outdoor air pollution.
References
 Clark L, Millet D, Marshall J. Air quality and urban form in U.S. urban area: Evidence from regulatory
monitors. environment Science and Technology, 2011; 45:7028–7035.
 B. Bereitschaft, K. Debbage
 Urban form, air pollution, and CO2 emissions in large U.S. metropolitan area
 Prof. Geogr., 65 (4) (2013), pp. 612–635
 S. Campbell, Green city, growing city, just city? urban_planning and the contradictions of
sustainable development Journal of the American Planning Association, 62 (1996)

Abstract Index #: 149
NOT IN MY BACKYARD BUT LET'S TALK: WHEN environmentISM MEETS DEVELOPMENTALISM IN CHINA
Abstract System ID#: 1170
Individual Paper
LIAO, Lu [Tsinghua University] liaolu316@163.com, presenting author
LIU, Zhilin [Tsinghua University] zhilinliu@tsinghua.edu.cn, primary author
MEI, Ciqi [Tsinghua University] cmei@tsinghua.edu.cn
Neighborhood-based environment activism, or the so-called NIMBY, has been a global phenomenon that
challenges many national and city governments in the decision process of major public projects. A popular
account for the widespread of environment protests concerns with the rise of environmentism accompanying
by the postmateralist transformation. As Inglehart put it, developed countries have experienced “a shift from
survival values to well-being values, from achievement motivation to post-materialist motivation.” Specifically,
post-materialist transformation has shifted individual’s utility functions in two ways. For one, individuals might
weigh the loss in their own life quality caused by environment externalities more than the gains brought by
economic development. For the other, individuals might weigh the well-being of others and of future generations

more than that of themselves and their own generations. Both shifts could lead to more active participation in
environment-related social movement.
While the environmentism account implies that NIMBY is more likely to be observed in developed countries,
the breakout of public protests against public project with potential environment externalities in developing
countries needs more careful investigations. The large-scale NIMBY movement observed in China in the past a
few years, mostly caused by the government’s siting decision on paraxylene (PX) plants or garbage facilities,
stands out as a very interesting case. As the largest developing country whose GDP still grows with an annual rate
around 8%, developmentalism still dominates, not without challenges, the mindset of the government and the
average people alike. At the same time, thanks to the disparity in development, environmentism also gains
grounds especially in China’s big city. Apparently, none of these two discourses could claim a clear victory at
such a transitional era. But why does large-scale NIMBY break out in China? Does the NIMBY movement suggest
that China’s has already passed the tipping point and become more environmentist? To add more complexity,
while the social movement literature suggests that deprivation of participation rights itself could be the origin of
social unrest, could the breakout of NIMBY movement be the result of lack of participation/transparence itself
rather than that of the rise of environmentism?
In this paper, we aim to answer these questions by analyzing a dataset derived from a survey we conducted over
2500 residents in four different Chinese city in 2014. We’ll compare the factors accounting for the opposition of
local residents two different projects with different environment and economic implications, i.e. the garbage
facilities and paraxylen (PX) plants. Although both projects have high environment risks, a garbage facility is a
necessary infrastructure serving the public good for urban residents whereas a paraxylene plant has more
developmental implication. Preliminary results suggest that (1) public opposition to a garbage facility is more
subject to individual’s concerns over own property values and health and safety risks, a pattern seemingly
consistent to the NIMBY phenomenon; (2) however, for an economic development project such as PX plants, it is
not concerns over own life quality, but rather lack of trust in government and deprivation of participation that
drive up pubic opposition; and (3) whereas environmentist views do not necessarily correlate with stronger
opposition to either project, concern over socio-economic development reduces the likelihood of opposition to
garbage facilities.
References
 Dear, M. (1992). Understanding and overcoming the NIMBY syndrome. Journal of the American Planning
Association, 58(3), 288-300.
 Johnson, R. J., & Scicchitano, M. J. (2012). Don't Call Me NIMBY: Public Attitudes Toward Solid Waste
Facilities. Environment and Behavior,44(3), 410-426.
 Lawrence, E., Stoker, R., & Wolman, H. (2010). Crafting Urban Policy The Conditions of Public Support for
Urban Policy Initiatives. Urban affairs review, 45(3), 412-430.
 Devine-Wright, P. (2005). Beyond NIMBYism: towards an integrated framework for understanding public
perceptions of wind energy. Wind energy, 8(2), 125-139.
 Johnson, T. (2010). environmentism and NIMBYism in China: promoting a rules-based approach to
public participation. environment Politics, 19(3), 430-448.

Abstract Index #: 150
PHOTOVOICE: VISUALIZING VULNERABILITY AND ADAPTATION
Abstract System ID#: 1173
Individual Paper
CAI, Yanjun [University of Hawaii at Manoa] yanjunc@hawaii.edu
In this paper, the author explores the benefits and challenges of Photovoice for investigating the  impact of
climate change and cultivating effective adaptation particularly for the disadvantaged populations. Few planning
scholars and practitioners have developed systematic adaptation models or tools to address climate-related risks
and vulnerability from the perspectives of affected comminuty. Photovoice, as a method of participatory action

research (PAR), has been applied in multiple fields including public health and education to analyze critical issues
and promote changes among marginalized populations, such as the disabled and women (Krieg & Roberts, 2007;
Strack et al., 2004; Wang, 1999; Wang & Buris, 1997). This research project has utilized Photovoice in three
disadvantaged comminuty in metropolitan Manila and Cebu of the Philippines to examine vulnerability and
adaptation via the local lens. During the project, each involved community participant is equipped with a smart
phone (with a camera) as well as the fundamental training of the methodology and photography. These
participatory photographers take photographs related to hazards and adaptation, develop narratives, upload
these to the social media platform, and collaboratively advance action plans and disseminative tools, including
participatory mapping and changemaking teams. It demonstrates the opportunities and obstacles of Photovoice
for climate adaption and community capacity building in the disadvantaged comminuty. Furthermore, this
paper explores how Photovoice can be contributed to the field of planning for social justice and community
change integrating the natural and built environment.
References
 Krieg, B., & Roberts, L. (2007). Photovoice: Insights into Marginalisation through a “Community Lens” in
Saskatchewan, Canada. In S. Kindon, R. Pain, & M. Kesby (Eds.), Participatory Action Research
Approaches and Methods: Connecting People, Participation and Place (pp. 150-159). New York:
Routledge.
 Strack, R. W., Magill, C., & McDonagh, K. (2004). Engaging youth through photovoice. Health Promotion
Practice, 5(1), 49-58.
 Wang, C. C. (2006). Youth participation in photovoice as a strategy for community change. Journal of
Community Practice, 14(1-2), 147-161.
 Wang, C. C., & Burris, M. A. (1997). Photovoice: Concept, methodology, and use for participatory needs
assessment. Health Education & Behavior, 24(3), 369-387.

Abstract Index #: 151
PLANNING FOR WATER EFFICIENT DEVELOPMENT
Abstract System ID#: 1206
Individual Paper
LASSITER, Allispon [University of California, Berkeley] abl@berkeley.edu
Many regions are reaching the ceiling of available water supplies, making it necessary to re-think water
consumption habits and management practices. California is one such place. The state is in the midst of a recordsetting drought, and there is mounting evidence that greater scarcity lies in the future (Andrew, forthcoming).
Yet, California also has a growing urban and suburban population (California Department of Finance 2014). With
less water and more people, sustained and systemic reduction in statewide water use is imperative.
In residential area, better managing outdoor water is a critical component of reducing total urban and suburban
water consumption. Outdoor water can comprise as much as 70% of a household water budget (Johnson and
Loux 2004). The factors that drive outdoor water use are not documented in many locations, however, and
findings from existing studies are often not extensible to new regions (Arbués et al 2003, House-Peters and Chang
2011). Further understanding the factors that drive outdoor water use is necessary to inform designs and plans
that promote urban water efficiency.
This study evaluates seven years of monthly water data from over 300,000 households in the East Bay Municipal
Utility District of California (EBMUD), an area with highly heterogeneous microclimates, housing typologies, and
demographics. The analysis focuses on the relationship between household water use and local environment
factors – vegetation, weather, and land form –by implementing a panel data model. The results from the analysis
indicate directions for the future water-efficient city, including possible adaptations to land cover and urban
form.

References
 Andrew, John. Forthcoming. "Adapting California's Water Sector to a Changing Climate." In Sustainable
Water: Challenges and Solutions from California, edited by Allison Lassiter. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
 California Department of Finance. 2014. State and County Total Population Projections, 2010-2060 (5year increments) . http://www.dof.ca.gov/research/demographic/reports/projections/P-1/
 Arbués, Fernando, Marı ́a Ángeles Garcı ́a-Valiñas, and Roberto Martı ́nez-Espiñeira. 2003. "Estimation of
Residential Water Demand: A State-of-the-Art Review." The Journal of Socio-Economics the Journal of
Socio-Economics 32 (1): 81-102.
 House-Peters, Lily A. and Heejun Chang. 2011. "Urban Water Demand Modeling: Review of Concepts,
Methods, and Organizing Principles." Water Resources Research 47 (5).
 Johnson, Karen E., and Jeff Loux. 2004. Water and  land_use: Planning wisely for California's future. Point
Arena, Calif.: Solano Press Books.

Abstract Index #: 152
NEIGHBORHOOD-SCALE CLIMATE ADAPTATION: REDUCING HUMAN VULNERABILITY TO URBAN HEAT STRESS
AND AIR POLLUTION
Abstract System ID#: 1243
Individual Paper
SHANDAS, Vivek [Portland State University] vshandas@pdx.edu, presenting author, primary author
DOOLING, Sarah [University of Texas at Austin] sarah.dooling@mail.utexas.edu
RAO, Meenakshi [Portland State University] mrao@pdx.edu
GEORGE, Linda [Portland State University] georgel@pdx.edu
VOELKEL, Jackson [Portland State University] jvoelkel@pdx.edu
Planning organizations throughout the United States are attempting to mitigate and adapt to the imminent
consequences of a warming planet. city pose an immediate threat to and opportunity for improving the
capacity for climate-induced  impact to citizens, businesses, and society at large. Indeed, with the majority of
humans now living in urban area, of paramount importance is developing effective approaches to reducing
emissions of climate warming gases, and ameliorating the  impact to those most impacted by extreme weather
events. While mitigation of green house gases (GHGs) is well underway by many city in the Western
Hemisphere, adaptation strategies are only emerging. Even fewer are examples of processes and plans that
directly reduce the implications of climate change on urban citizens, and especially those who are least able to
cope with extreme climate events (e.g. flooding, urban heat islands, tropospheric ozone, etc.).
To address these challenges, planning organizations need to know about effective approaches that reduce
vulnerability and improve the resiliency of local comminuty, while providing guidance for adapting to the
imminent threats of climate change. Our paper assesses human vulnerability to heat stress and degraded air
quality by engaging local planners, community organizers, and researchers in a ‘research to action’ model. By
pairing a local university with regional stakeholders, we develop a hazard-specific definition of human
vulnerability and the extent to which specific comminuty are impacted by urban heat stress and degraded air
quality. Ours is a novel approach to linking citizen-based participatory governance with data intensive mapping
exercises that forecast the social, environment and economic  impact of alternative spatial options. We apply
our approach to the City of Portland’s (OR) recently adopted ‘Climate Change Preparedness Strategy’, which
focuses on social and institutional adaptation Our paper describes this adaptation strategy, and assessing three
dimensions of vulnerability – exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity. Further we describe our ‘research to
action’ model, which entails a series of workshops with local stakeholders that help to characterize Portland
neighborhoods in terms of climate-induced stressors specific to urban heat, urban form and  land_use stressors
specific to air quality, interaction of the two, and specific ‘hot spot’ neighborhood experiencing both. These
resulting maps provide an intra-urban comparative perspective, which are further integrated with relevant land
use, land cover, transportation data to identify specific stressors by neighborhood. The identification of
neighborhood-scale stressors, for example, urban heat islands within socially vulnerable area, enable
stakeholders to identify leverage points for potential short- and long-term strategies. The results are captured in

a single online interactive resource allowing individuals, comminuty, and relevant public and private
organizations to query and assess the urban heat and air quality of a specific neighborhood. We conclude with a
description of the central tenets that enabled our research to action model to be implemented in the Portland
region. Although our paper focuses on Portland, the processes we’ve developed for engaging researchers and
planners are generally applicable, as are our findings.
References
 Bassett, E, and V Shandas 2010. "Innovation in Municipal Climate Planning", Journal of the American
Planning Association 76(4): 435 - 450
 Greenwood, D. J. & Levin, M., Introduction to action research. Second edition, Thousand Oaks, Calif.:
Sage Publications, 2007.
 Sonia Graham, Jon Barnett, Ruth Fincher, Colette Mortreux, Anna Hurlimann. (2014) Towards fair local
outcomes in adaptation to sea-level rise. Climatic Change.
 Harlan SL, Brazel A, Prashad L, Stefanov WL, Larsen L. 2006. Neighborhood microclimates and
vulnerability to heat stress. Soc Sci Med 63:2847–2863

Abstract Index #: 153
EXAMINING PLACE-BASED RESILIENCE UNPACKING MEANINGS OF RISK AND VULNERABILITY AMONG
MARGINALIZED POPULATIONS
Abstract System ID#: 1244
Individual Paper
RAMASUBRAMANIAN, Laxmi [Hunter College of CUNY] laxmi@hunter.cuny.edu
The idea of resilience and resilient city has become the subject of recent inquiry among policymakers,
practitioners, and the general public. Walker and Salt, in their influential book on resilience thinking propose that
resilience is “the ability of a system to absorb disturbances and still retain its basic function and structure”
(Walker and Salt, 2006). Both ideological and disciplinary orientations impact and influence Walker and Salt’s
definition, but there is wide-spread agreement that the “system” under consideration must include the built,
natural, and social environment and the term social-ecological resilience (Adger et al., 2005) appears to capture
the dynamic nature of urban environments. For planning practitioners, the term “resilience” itself, immediately
provokes the questions, resilience “of what” and “to what” (Carpenter et al., 2001). Cutter et al. (2008) proposed
a place-based model of resilience which considered ecological, social, economic, institutional, infrastructure, and
community variables in conceptualizing and measuring the resilience of neighborhood and comminuty.
In this paper, I examine different understandings of risk and vulnerability to further understand and develop
Cutter’s framework: the Disaster Resilience in Place (DROP) model using preliminary data gathered from field
work in Jamaica Bay, New York in 2014. The region around Jamaica Bay, with its many neighborhood and varied
populations, reflects the challenges of understanding and defining community resilience especially in the wake of
large-scale socio-ecological disturbances such as Superstorm Sandy in October 2012. In the course of eighteen
months after the disaster event occurred, this research engaged residents and community organizers who were
affected by Superstorm Sandy to better understand the resilience capacity of their neighborhood. Interviews,
focus groups, and participation in community meetings and events were directed towards: 1) understanding the
extent of community service networks in the region as well as current political and social issues; 2) the  impact of
Superstorm Sandy in specific neighborhood and comminuty; and 3) broader concerns and gaps affecting social
and ecological sustainability in the region. Beyond this, however, the research also focused on broader historical
contexts, tracking changes in the environment, infrastructure, demographics, economics, and politics that have
shaped the current state, individual as well as shared understandings of community resilience among members of
the Jamaica Bay region that were consulted for this study.
Poor people, affected with a myriad of economic challenges appeared less prepared to engage with both the
immediate effects and medium/long term  impact of natural disasters. There is need for more critical education

about the idea of resilience as well broad citizen engagement in planning for resilience to natural disasters so that
the most vulnerable populations are not left behind and further marginalized as a result of natural disasters.
References
 Adger, WN., Hughes, TP., Folke, C, Carpenter, SR, Rockstrom, J, 2005. Social- ecological resilience to
coastal disasters. Science 309 (5737), 1036–1039
 Carpenter, S, Walker, B, Anderies, JM, Abel, N, 2001. From metaphor to measurement: resilience of
what to what? Ecosystems 4 (8), 765–781
 Cutter, SL, Barnes, L, Berry, M, Burton, C, Evans, E, Tate, E, and J Webb. "A Place-based Model for
Understanding Community Resilience to Natural Disasters." Global environment Change 18.4 (2008):
598-606
 Walker, B. and D. Salt. 2006. Resilience Thinking: Sustaining Ecosystems and People in a Changing World.
Washington: Island Press

Abstract Index #: 154
LINKING COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT TO CARBON MITIGATION: THE CASE OF LOW-CARBON comminuty IN
URBAN CHINA
Abstract System ID#: 1257
Individual Paper
LI, Yunjing [Columbia University] yl2510@columbia.edu
China has become the largest CO2 emitter in the world since 2007, but its per capita carbon emission is currently
only one-fifth of that in the United States. The fact that China is expected to turn an estimate of 350 million rural
residents into urbanites over the next 20 years calls for extra urgencies for China’s carbon control. Among various
strategies for carbon mitigation, the idea of a low-carbon community in urban area has obtained increasing
recognition with the rise of a variety of low-carbon community initiatives. This represents a shift in China’s
climate policy which used to focus disproportionately on production-side carbon control.
Existing literature on community-level climate action conceptualizes community as (a) a means through which
changes in social practices and behaviors to produce less carbon intensive lifestyles can be achieved (Heiskanen
et al., 2010; Middlemiss and Parrish, 2010; Moloney et al., 2010); and/or (b) a site where appropriate forms of
technology may be developed and deployed. The success of such action is dependent upon “community
capacity”, or “the ability of the community in question and its members to make changes by drawing on the
resources available to them individually and collectively” (Middlemiss & Parrish, 2010, p.7561; Ivey et al., 2004;
Newman & Dale, 2005; Rydin & Pennington, 2000). The prospect of community capacity building is, however,
ambiguous in China given its mostly authoritative planning system and a short history of community
development.
This paper examines the relationship between community capacity building, the socio-institutional environment
of community-level activities, and performance of a low-carbon community in urban China. Here a “low-carbon
community” is defined as a neighborhood that incorporates some low-carbon technologies, such as green
buildings, on-site renewable energy sources and waste management system, into its design and/or operation. By
revealing this relationship, the paper helps to understand to what extent and under what circumstances the
community approach can contribute to the goal of carbon mitigation.
Taking three comminuty composed of green buildings as an instrumental case (Yin, 2009) of low-carbon
communities, the paper is focused around three questions: (1) What activities are taking place in these
communities relative to green buildings and how are these activities organized? (2) Why are some comminuty
doing a better job in the creation/maintenance/management of green buildings than others and what is the role
of community capacity? (3) What are the incentives and barriers for comminuty to utilize green building
technologies in order to achieve environment goals?

The paper is based on 40 semi-structured interviews with a variety of stakeholders, including community
residents and organization members, developers, property management companies, local government officials,
green building experts, and etc.. It is also based on secondary data sources, such as policy documents, media
reports, and archival records. In addition, information is collected through multiple field trips to studied
communities. The strategy of triangulation is used among different sources of data.
While this research is on-going, my preliminary findings show that the success of a low-carbon community in
urban China is dependent upon the formation of corresponding institutions and, in particular, a partnership
where public, private and civic actors fully participate in related activities and coordinate with each other.
References
 Middlemiss, L. and Parrish, B. D. (2010). Building capacity for low-carbon comminuty: the role of
grassroots initiatives, Energy Policy, 38, pp.7559-7566.
 Moloney, S. Horne, R. E. & Fien, J. (2010). Transitioning to low carbon comminuty-from behaviour
change to systemic change: lessons from Australia. Energy Policy, 38, pp.7614-7623.
 Ivey, J., Smithers, J., De Loe, R. C. and Kreutzwiser, R. D. (2004) Community capacity for adaptation to
climate-induced water shortages: linking institutional complexity and local actors, environment
Management, 33(1), pp.36-47.
 Newman, L. & Dale, A. (2005) The role of agency in sustainable local community development, Local
Environment, 10(5), pp.477-486.
 Rydin, Y. & Pennington, M. (2000) Public participation and local environment planning: the collective
action problem and the potential of social capital, Local Environment, 5(2), pp.153-169.

Abstract Index #: 155
RESEARCH ON SPATIAL CORRELATION OF THE REGIONAL HAZE POLLUTION AND HEAVY INDUSTRY
DISTRIBUTION: BEIJING, TIANJIN, HEBEI OF CHINA AS A CASE
Abstract System ID#: 1282
Poster
QIAN, LIU [Tongji University, Shanghai] hbhslq@qq.com
As the Beijing’s record breaking 175 days of high pollution alarming in 2014, the air pollution and climate change
around Beijing and even across north China draws the world’s concern. It is widely argued by Environment
experts and media that heavy industry, energy structure, automobile exhaust are three dominate factors to the
severe condition, while in regional planning field rare studies have been conducted about the spatial correlation
between the distribution of terrible haze and heavy industries. Thus in the regional spatial planning and industrial
policy, what is the government’s priority combating the harmful haze and climate change?
The research and the preliminary results include three parts. Firstly collecting 13 city’ monthly average index of
PM2.5, the total numbers of days of pollution levels are calculated. Aided by the tools of spatial interpolation and
contour on Gis10.2, the contour maps demonstrating the numbers of high-level pollution days are simulated. It
shows two fog and haze poles -Zhangjiakou and Cangzhou-Baoding, and a trend of intercity diffusing. Secondly,
the analysis is conducted on spatial correlation between hazed days and location quotient of 6 heavy industries
consisting cement, steel, coking, heat-engine plant, chemical engineering and non-ferrous. Obviously, there exists
an appreciable relativity between the number of high-level haze days and heavy industry concentration standard.
Further, based on the SPSS, the multiple linear regressions between the numbers of high-level dazed days and
the 6 heavy industries’ location quotient make it clear that the concentration of cement and steel are two main
contributors.
This paper also analysis the recent central and local policy aiming to ease air pollution. It argues that although
the central and provincial government emphasis on the transformation of regional industry structure, some
severe contaminated city are not proactive.

According to the guidance of central government, taking the geographical and economical characteristics into
account, this study at last tries to put forward suggestions that the time sequence for the regional transformation
of industry and spatial structure should be set scientifically.
References
 Zhang, X.Y., Sun J.Y., Wang, Y. 2013. Thoughts on the causes of China’s haze and easing
strategies.Chinese science bulletin. 58(13):1178-1187.
 Jin, F.S., Zhu, J.H., Zhang, S.D.2013. Annual national planning conference, December 16, 2013: Haze and
planning: thoughts and research on urban_planning in post haze era. Qingdao, Shangdong: Urban
planning society of China.
 Wang, Y.J., 2012.Research on the game between local and central government on the air pollution
control. Master thesis, Oil University of Southwest China. http://www.cnki.net/(accessed February
20,2014 )

Abstract Index #: 156
 land_use PLANNING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION ON THE LAURENTIAN GREAT LAKES
Abstract System ID#: 1298
Individual Paper
NORTON, Richard [University of Michigan] rknorton@umich.edu, presenting author, primary author
BUCKMAN, Stephen [University of South Florida] buckmans@umich.edu
DAVID, Nina [University of Delaware] npdavid@udel.edu
In addition to its ocean coasts, the United States enjoys substantial inland freshwater seas—the five Laurentian
Great Lakes. These lakes extend some 750 miles from east to west, touch some 4,500 linear miles of U.S.
shoreline, and cover a combined surface area of about 95,000 square miles, roughly the size of the United
Kingdom. As with ocean coasts, the Great Lakes are large enough to generate substantial hazards to shorelands
both from ongoing erosional processes and periodic storm events. Great Lakes coasts are different from ocean
coasts, however, in several key respects physically and institutionally. Most prominently, they are geologically
young features subject to background erosion rates of about 1-2 feet per year throughout much of the basin,
while simultaneously subject to fluctuations in standing lake water levels on the order of 1 or 2 meters over the
course of decades (Norton and Meadows 2014). Because of those fluctuations, Great Lakes shorelines can appear
to be retreating lakeward (accreting) for extended periods while lake levels are low, only to move substantially
inland as water levels again rise. It is not clear how climate change will affect the Great Lakes overall, but it will
likely increase the frequency and intensity of storms (Gronewold et al. 2013). Institutionally, the Great Lakes are
also unique because most of the states bordering them are Northwest Territory states with civil townships (i.e., in
addition to counties and municipalities), yielding highly fragmented local governance of Great Lakes shorelands.
All of the Great Lakes states have also applied the Public Trust Doctrine to their Great Lakes shorelands, yielding
state-local legal and policy institutional arrangements that are highly diverse and complex (Norton et al., 2011,
2013).
This paper will present a systematic analysis of local efforts to plan for the management of Great Lakes shoreland
areas through master plans, and to implement those plans through zoning codes and infrastructure policy,
focusing on coastal Michigan localities. The paper will first provide a brief overview of the physical attributes that
make the Great Lakes unique, along with a brief description of the federal, state, and local enabling authorities
and other institutional arrangements that structure planning, regulation, and policy adoption by coastal Michigan
localities. The paper will then report findings from the systematic content analysis of local master plans and
zoning codes conducted for selected coastal Michigan localities in the mid 2000s and again in the early 2010s (for
those localities that updated plans or amended codes), along with findings from a survey a planners and other
administrative officials conducted in the mid 2000s. The paper will also report findings from several selected case
study analyses of current local efforts to adapt their master planning in the face of climate change—during a
period of dramatic increases in lake water levels following an extended period of low levels. Finally, the paper will

conclude with a brief analysis of the applicability of these findings from Michigan to other Great Lakes coastal
settings.
References
 Gronewold, Andrew D., et al. 2013. Coasts, water levels, and climate change: A Great Lakes perspective.
Climatic Change 120:697-711.
 Norton, Richard K. and Guy A. Meadows. 2014. Land and water governance on the shores of the
Laurentian Great Lakes. Water International 39(6):901-920.
 Norton, Richard K., Guy A. Meadows, and Lorelle A. Meadows. 2013. The deceptively complicated
‘elevation ordinary high water mark’ and the problem with using it on a Great Lakes shore. Journal of
Great Lakes Research 39(2013):527-535.
 Norton, Richard K., Lorelle A. Meadows, and Guy A. Meadows. 2011. Drawing lines in law books and on
sandy beaches: Marking ordinary high water on Michigan’s Great Lakes shorelines under the public trust
doctrine. Coastal Management 39(2):133-157.

Abstract Index #: 157
IMPACT STUDY OF URBAN SPATIAL FACTORS ON RESPIRATORY HEALTH AND THEIR PLANNING IMPROVEMENT
Abstract System ID#: 1300
Individual Paper
ZHAO, Xiaojing [Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University] Drzhaoxiaojing@aliyun.com, presenting author,
primary author
WANG, Lan [Tongji University] wanglan@tongji.edu.cn
TANG, Jian [Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University] drtangjian@gmail.com
JIANG, Xiji [Tongji University] Jiangxiji@yahoo.com
Air pollution, especially particulate matter (PM), has become a significant issue in urban environment, and has
caused increasing incidence of respiratory diseases. Empirical study is needed to enrich the concept and planning
of healthy city that has gradually become the center of attention. Based on the studies of the relationship
between PM and respiratory diseases and between built environment and PM concentration, this paper
investigates the impact mechanism of multiple urban spatial factors on incidence of respiratory disease with a
focus on lung cancer, and also explores methodology to improve planning for healthy city.
This paper will 1) analyze spatial distribution and variation tendency of lung cancer patients in Shanghai, 2) build
an empirical model for the impact mechanism at both individual and neighborhood levels, explore spatial factors
at urban, neighborhood and housing levels, such as  land_use, density and housing type, and identify spatial
factors with significant impact on respiratory health and their magnitude of impact, and 3) simulate the built
environment, wind field and PM2.5/10 distribution of typical high-incidence neighborhood, and conduct
scenario building based on adjustable significant spatial factors. Planning index and principles will be improved
accordingly to adjust PM distribution and mitigate its exposure to human beings. The paper attempts to provide
an empirical basis for planning a healthy city in order to decrease the incidence of respiratory diseases.
References
 Pope III C A, Burnett R T, Thun M J, et al. Lung cancer, cardiopulmonary mortality, and long-term
exposure to fine particulate air pollution[J]. Jama, 2002, 287(9): 1132-1141.
 Rebecca Miles, David E. Jacobs (2008). Future Directions in Housing and Public Health: Findings From
Europe With Broader Implications for Planners. Journal of the American Planning Association, 74:1, 7789
 Ho C C, Chan C C, Cho C W, et al.  land_use regression modeling with vertical distribution measurements
for fine particulate matter and elements in an urban area[J]. Atmospheric Environment, 2015, 104: 256263.
 Weng Q, Yang S. Urban air pollution patterns,  land_use, and thermal landscape: an examination of the
linkage using GIS[J]. environment monitoring and assessment, 2006, 117(1-3): 463-489.



Sarkar C, Webster C, Gallacher J. Healthy city: Public Health Through urban_planning[M]. Edward Elgar
Publishing, 2014.

Abstract Index #: 158
POLICY ANALYSIS OF GHG REDUCTION program IN CALIFORNIA
Abstract System ID#: 1321
Individual Paper
BOSWELL, Michael [California Polytechnic State University] mboswell@calpoly.edu, presenting author, primary
author
GREENBLATT, Jeffery [Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory] jbgreenblatt@lbl.gov
In this study we assess the potential for established greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction policy and program in
California to achieve their reduction targets/potential given implementation constraints. California has an
ambitious and well-developed program for achieving significant GHG emissions reduction as established in the
Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 (a.k.a., AB32). The State has approximately 31 individual policy and
programs that are being implemented to achieve 1990 emissions levels by 2020 and ultimately move the State
towards an 80% reduction below 1990 by 2050 target (Greenblatt 2015).
In theory these policy and program add up to meet the desired 2020 target and State (State of California
2014) and independent (Greenblatt 2015) analyses report that it is on track to do so, but implementation is rarely
perfect. Real world constraints such as funding, political viability, administrative feasibility, compliance, and other
related factors likely limit the attainment of full implementation. A policy analytic approach involving
quantitative and qualitative forecasting is used to develop probability estimates for implementation that will then
be used to adjust GHG emissions reduction targets/potential. The product will be an expected GHG reduction and
a set of probabilistic estimates of the likelihood of achieving overall AB32 GHG emissions reduction targets.
To estimate GHG emissions reduction, we employ the CALGAPS model developed by Jeffery B. Greenblatt of
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, which has already been used for this purpose (see Greenblatt 2015). To
establish probability estimates, we use a combination of quantitative and qualitative forecasting techniques
depending on the particular variable of interest. For example, to estimate the likelihood of achieving the
Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS), we use a quantitative forecast based on current and historical data prepared
by the California Public Utilities Commission (see CPUC 2014). And, to estimate the likelihood of achieving the
CPUC Strategic Plan for efficient building we employ the Delphi method (a qualitative expert consensus-building
process).
Initial findings indicate that implementation success varies. Some program are exceeding expectations whereas
other program are showing little progress or are difficult to measure. Many states are looking to California as a
model of state-level policy for reducing GHG emissions. This study provides insights that other states can use to
more carefully develop their suite of policy. Moreover, California can use these results to adjust and develop
policies that will be successful in achieving the significant 2050 reduction targets. Finally, this study also
contributes to the general understanding on change change policy implementation and identifies key variables
and causal relationships (Wheeler 2008; Drummond 2010).
References
 California Public Utilities Commission (2014). Renewable portfolio standard quarterly report, 3rd quarter
2014. Retrieved from: http://www.cpuc.ca.gov/NR/rdonlyres/CA15A2A8-234D-4FB4-BE4105409E8F6316/0/2014Q3RPSReportFinal.pdf
 Drummond, W. J. (2010). Statehouse versus greenhouse. Journal of the American Planning, 76(4): 1-21.
 Greenblatt, Jeffery B. (2015). Modeling California policy  impact on greenhouse gas emissions. Energy
Policy 78, 158-172. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2014.12.024





State of California. 2014. First update to the Climate Change Scoping Plan: Building on the framework.
Retrieved from:
http://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/scopingplan/2013_update/first_update_climate_change_scoping_plan.pdf
Wheeler, S. (2008). State and municipal climate change plans: The first generation. Journal of the
American Planning Association, 74(4): 481-496.

Abstract Index #: 159
TRAP (TRAFFIC-RELATED AIR POLLUTION) IN SHANGHAI
Abstract System ID#: 1344
Individual Paper
BAE, Christine [Department of Urban Design & Planning, University of Washington] cbae@uw.edu, presenting
author, primary author
LING, Shijia [University of Washington] lingshijia@hotmail.com
Although PM2.5, one of the most dangerous types of air pollution, is widely studied in Europe and the United
States, it is now recognized as becoming very serious in other parts of the world, especially China. This paper is
about Shanghai’s traffic-related air pollution (TRAP). We analyze the PM2.5 levels between 2002 and 2012. As in
most locations, the health consequences of TRAP severely impact the vulnerable population with respiratory
diseases, the elderly and children. The research focuses on TRAP by year and by location. The intertemporal
changes are measured by descriptive statistics (kilometers traveled and fuel consumption by vehicle type). Then,
we applied the Gaussian Dispersion Model (GDM) modified by the Kriging Interpolation to analyze and visualize
the intra-regional air quality variations in and around the first ring (West/East of the Inner City) and the second
ring (West/East of the Suburb) in the City of Shanghai. Finally, we introduced the concept of the TRAP-SHHPA
(Spatial Health Hazard Priority Area) to help air quality planners to prioritize focus area.
The main findings are that cleaner emission standards, restrictions on the use of certain vehicle types in central
districts, and elevated freeways reduce PM2.5 concentrations in the city center. On the other hand, TRAP-PM2.5
levels are increasing in the primarily residential suburbs. Shanghai TRAP-SHHPA analysis highlight the location
where TRAP- PM2.5 emissions levels and/or the vulnerable population concentration levels are higher. The
Northwest and Southeast Shanghai (Yangpu, Jiading, Hongkou, and Zhabei Districts) were the two regions that
were facing the severest PM2.5 effects. The paper will conclude with planning implications and future research
directions.
References
 Bae, C.-H. C., Sandlin, G., Bassok, A., & Kim, S. (2007). The exposure of disadvantaged populations in
freeway air-pollution sheds: a case study of the Seattle and Portland regions. , Environment and
planning B: planning and design, 34(1), 154-170
 Hong, E. A., Bae, C.-H. C. (2012) Bicyclists’ Exposure to Air Pollution in Seattle: A Hybrid Analysis Using
Personal Monitoring and  land_use Regression, Transportation Research Record, 2270, pp. 59-66
 Health Effects Institute. Panel on the Health Effects of Traffic-Related Air Pollution. (2010). Trafficrelated air pollution: a critical review of the literature on emissions, exposure, and health effects (No.
17). Health Effects Institute.
 Boldo, E., Medina, S., Le Tertre, A., Hurley, F., Mücke, H. G., Ballester, F., & Aguilera, I. (2006). Apheis:
Health impact assessment of long-term exposure to PM2. 5 in 23 European city. European journal of
epidemiology, 21(6), 449-458.
 Chen, C., Huang, C., Jing, Q., Wang, H., Pan, H., Li, L., ... & Streets, D. G. (2007). On-road emission
characteristics of heavy-duty diesel vehicles in Shanghai. Atmospheric Environment, 41(26), 5334-5344.

Abstract Index #: 160
ENERGY AND URBAN FORM EXPLORED THROUGH DYNAMIC NETWORKED INFRASTRUCTURE MODEL
Abstract System ID#: 1350

Individual Paper
GUHATHAKURTA, Subhrajit [Georgia Institute of Technology] subhro@gatech.edu, presenting author, primary
author
MIDDEL, Ariane [Arizona State University] ariane.middel@asu.edu
Urban form,  land_use patterns, and the type of structures significantly influence a city's energy needs, and
consequently, its greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Engineering and design of urban form is an important strategy
for managing climate change and other environment  impact of energy use, as well as being key to the livability
of city. This study develops a longitudinal network model to examine trends in energy use and carbon emissions
associated with urban form,  land_use patterns, buildings, and travel behavior. The uniqueness of this conceptual
model rests on the notion of connected infrastructure that integrates energy use in separate categories (vehicles,
travel infrastructure, and buildings) into a network where each activity node is dependent on other nodes of both
similar and different activities. In this connected infrastructure, residential energy demands are determined in
part by the location and type of retail, entertainment, and commercial activities and on the patterns of linkages
among them. This model offers an excellent means to examine trends in energy use and carbon emissions
associated with urban form,  land_use patterns, buildings, and travel behavior.
The question of what patterns and forms of  land_use and building types offer significant gains in energy efficiency
is particularly salient given the impending growth in demand for new housing. According to recent estimates, the
current housing stock will have to be expanded by about 50% by 2030 to accommodate the projected new
households (Pitkins and Myers 2008). A small percentage of the new housing units (0.2 to 0.6 percent per year) is
expected to be replacement units. Therefore, the development characteristics of the new units in terms of their
location, density, material use, and design, as well as their fit with the existing urban fabric, will have a significant
impact on future energy use.
This study aims to find new insights about the relationships between urban form/ land_use patterns and energy
use in order to better manage urban_planning and development. While there has been a number of illuminating
studies on urban form and its energy implications, important unanswered questions still remain. Specifically, the
connection between energy use and the level of compactness in residential  land_use has been the focus of
several studies, but the contribution of a more expanded set of characteristics about settlement patterns on
energy and emissions have not been attempted to date. Some prominent studies such as those by Norman et al
(2006) and VandeWeghe and Kennedy (2007) include life cycle energy  impact of transportation and buildings. Results
show significantly lower energy use for compact area. While population density is certainly a key indicator, it is
important to understand how other urban system characteristics such as land-use diversity and local retail and
service availability affect energy use. Understanding a larger set of urban characteristics enhances the design
space for energy mitigation. For example, suburban neighborhood with increasing numbers of employment and
services could reduce vehicle miles traveled. Conversely a compact urban form with high population density
could save less energy than expected if residents end up driving long distances to work or other shopping. The
network model proposed here will be able to distinguish the evolution of the travel behavior and associated
infrastructure networks as comminuty develop residential, work and service infrastructures.
References
 Norman, J., MacLean, H., M.ASCE., & Kennedy, C. A. (2006). Comparing High and Low Residential
Density: Life-Cycle Analysis of Energy Use and Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Journal of urban_planning and
Development , 132 (1), 10-21.
 Pitkin, J., & Meyers, D. (2008). U.S. Housing Trends: Generational Changes and the Outlook to 2050, for
Special Report 298, Driving and the Built Environment: The Effects Of Compact Development On
Motorized Travel, Energy Use, And CO2 Emissions. Retrieved February 10, 2010, from
http://onlinepubs.trb.org/Onlinepubs/sr/sr298pitkin-myers.pdf
 VandeWeghe, J. R., & Kennedy, C. (2007). A Spatial Analysis of Residential Greenhouse Gas Emissions in
the Toronto Census Metropolitan Area. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 11 (2), 133-144.
 Nichols, B. G. and Kockelman K. M. Life-cycle energy implications of different residential settings:
Recognizing buildings, travel, and public infrastructure. Energy Policy. 68; 2014, 232-242.



Frijia S., Guhathakurta S., and Williams E. Re-examining the life cycle energy of residences; functional
unit, technological dynamics and scaling. Journal of environment Science and Technology 46 (3); 2012,
1782–1788.

Abstract Index #: 161
CLIMATE JUSTICE AND THE AMERICAN URBAN RISKSCAPE: THE DISTRIBUTION OF CLIMATE AND WEATHERRELATED RISKS WITHIN city, AND THEIR IMPLICATIONS FOR CITY ADAPTIVE PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 1371
Individual Paper
KLEIN ROSENTHAL, Joyce [Harvard University] joyce.rosenthal@gmail.com
Efforts to identify the high-risk area within city that are especially vulnerable to the  impact of weather
extremes such as heat waves and floods developed rapidly in the last decade of increasing risk for urban, and
especially coastal, populations. Geospatial analysis is increasingly used to evaluate associations of a range of
vulnerability characteristics at the intra-urban scale, including socio-demographic, biophysical, built environment,
infrastructural and housing characteristics to population health outcomes during extreme events, such as hospital
admissions or excess mortality. These climate and health spatial analyses tend to confirm and recapitulate prior
findings of significant health disparities found in high-poverty and minority neighborhood that endure similar
patterns of health disparities for chronic diseases and for other environment exposures. To evaluate whether
six large American city follow this “climate injustice” spatial pattern, we use spatial regression analysis with
indicators of social, built environment and biophysical characteristics at the census tract level to identify the
distribution of risk and potential exposures to the hazards of climate extremes within the city. By mapping
‘neighborhood riskscapes’, places where residents might be vulnerable to hazardous exposures during extreme
weather events, we identified places that historically accumulated a range of pyscho-social and built environment
hazards, risks and/or noxious exposures – places of environment injustice. We discuss the need for current
municipal planning for hazard risk reduction and climate resilience to identify risks at finer spatial scales and the
neighborhood-level, and conclude by proposing a new framework for assessing the spatial scales relevant for city
climate adaptation risk assessments that seeks to guide public investment in resilience to environment change,
heat waves, and flooding.
References
 Rosenthal, J. K., Kinney, P. L., & Metzger, K. B. (2014). Intra-urban vulnerability to heat-related mortality
in New York City, 1997–2006. Health & Place, 30, 45-60.
 Morello-Frosch, R., & Shenassa, E. D. (2006). The environment" riskscape" and social inequality:
implications for explaining maternal and child health disparities. environment health perspectives,
1150-1153.

Track 4: Gender and Diversity in Planning
Abstract Index #: 162
PLANNING policy, RELIGIOUS CLUSTERS AND INTERFAITH DIALOGUE
Abstract System ID#: 9
Individual Paper
AGRAWAL, Sandeep [University of Alberta] sagrawal@ualberta.ca
Canada has witnessed a sharp rise in religious pluralism in the recent decade or so, also evidenced in a
proliferation of Christian as well as non-Christian places of worship in metropolitan area.

The growth of religious plurality and geographic proximity raises important questions about religious tolerance
and conflicts. In the U.S. for example, the location of mosques has been a controversial  land_use issue, especially
following the terrorist attacks of 9/11. The planning profession is challenged to accommodate religious places of
worship, especially those of new immigrants whose religions differ from that of the Judeo-Christian faiths
(Agrawal, 2009). In a bid to solve this problem, planners in Canadian metropolitan area have resorted to siting
religious places in vacant lands originally zoned as industrial or agricultural (Agrawal, 2009). Over time, such
planning actions have led to the formation of religious clusters in a few places in which multiple institutions of
different faith groups reside in close proximity.
This paper explores the role of physical proximity of places of worship and planning policy in facilitating
interfaith dialogue. The research focuses on two religious clusters, perhaps unique in North America: one in the
Greater Toronto Area, which emerged due to incremental zoning changes over time; and the other in Greater
Vancouver, which came about by a deliberate policy of the local government. Using key informant interviews as
the method, and Allport’s contact hypothesis as the guiding theoretical framework, it explores the effects of
proximity and contact (interaction or encounters) on intergroup relations.
The findings suggest that physical proximity is not a strong factor in facilitating interfaith dialogue initiatives.
However, proximity does seem to have an effect in creating a space for interactions and encounters to occur,
which can lead to attitudinal shifts concerning the religious “other.” Planning policy and development plans
have a limited effect on interfaith dialogue. However, the social capital developed through municipal projects can
be channelled and sustained to stimulate interfaith dialogue, suggesting religious clusters as a distinct model of
harmonious co-existence of multiple faiths.
References
 Allport, G.W. (1954). The Nature of Prejudice. New York: Addison-Wesley Publishing.
 Gale, R., & Naylor, S. (2002). “Religion, planning and the city: The spatial politics of ethnic minority
expression in British city and towns.” Ethnicities 2(23), 387–409.
 Hackworth, J. & Stein, K. (2012). “The collision of faith and economic development in Toronto’s inner
suburban industrial districts.” Urban Affairs Review 48(1), 37–63.
 Hoernig, H.J. (2009). “Planning amidst cultural diversity: Lessons from religious development.” Plan
Canada. Special issue edited by Agrawal et al. 55–59.
 Agrawal, S. (2009). “New ethnic places of worship and planning challenges.” Plan Canada Special Edition.
March. 64–67.

Abstract Index #: 163
ENABLING LOCAL DEMOCRATIC OPPORTUNITIES THROUGH INCREASED COLLABORATION BETWEEN PLANNERS
AND PUBLIC LIBRARIANS
Abstract System ID#: 124
Individual Paper
KNAPP, Courtney [California State Polytechnic University, Pomona] courtney.e.knapp@gmail.com
Introduction
Librarians and library and information science scholars have noted the significance of public libraries to
community building and community development practice (American Library Association, 2013; Skot-Hansen et
al. 2013; Veil and Bishop 2014). In the field of city planning, however, scholarship exploring the mutual interests
of and potential collaborations between planners and public librarians is nonexistent. This paper fills this gap in
the literature by asking how local planners might improve their practice through regular and ongoing
collaboration with public librarians. I explore the potential spatial, social, and cultural  impact of increased
collaboration, and suggest that through increased partnership, each may reinforce the other as a critical 21st
century public institution.

Theoretical Framework
Little scholarly attention has been paid to planner-librarian collaboration, but a closer look at the two professions
reveals similar histories and evolving institutional goals. Both represent civically-minded municipal institutions
that must evolve and adapt to remain relevant and accessible to the comminuty that they serve (Whitesides
1998, Zabel 2011). Shifting demographics, worsening social inequality, and technology advances significantly
impact both professions’ identities, organizational structures, and service missions (Bignell 1989, Clark 2005,
Gordon 2007, Hayden and Ball-Rokeach 2007). Most importantly, planners and librarians have mutual
commitments to social transformation through resident empowerment and capacity building (Innes, 1996).
Newfield (2004) noted that horizontal, collaborative atmospheres rarely evolve organically in local planning
settings. Planners must be able and willing to devise innovative participation processes that work with
historically underrepresented citizens to transform themselves into agents “unburdened” by the powerful forces
of personal and social disempowerment. Public libraries can be, and often are, central spaces of unburdening.
Public libraries provide critical democratizing spaces in city. They function as public meeting grounds (Given
and Lecke, 2003; Aabø, et al., 2010; McDowell, 2014), electronic mail and internet workstations (Mandel et al.
2010), public document repositories, grey literature archives (Jackson, 2005), adult education libraries, and
workforce development centers (Rooney-Browne, 2013). Furthermore, libraries often attract patrons who are
unusual suspects to mainstream local planning processes, including low income residents, youth, immigrants, and
homeless/ transient populations (Joseph, 2010; Williams and Edwards, 2011; Muggleton, 2013; Frederiksen,
2014). Third, libraries help residents cultivate their civic identities and promote individual and community
empowerment-- processes planners strive for in their own work (Gong, et al, 2008; Pitayi and Kamal, 2012; Griffis
and Johnson, 2014). For these reasons, planners who are dedicated to creating more democratic comminuty
ought to explore sustained collaborations with local public librarians.
Methodology
This paper combines content and meta-analyses (Gaber and Gaber 2001) with an exploratory, comparative case
study design (Yin 1998). To begin, it traces the historical developments and professional goals of city planning
and library science to illustrate how the two fields are well poised to support and reinforce one another as 21st
century civic institutions. The second section compares two recent planner—public librarian collaborations,
located in Chattanooga, Tennessee, and Pomona, California, respectively. Both initiatives combined the
resources and research expertise of planners and local librarians to engage historically underrepresented and
excluded residents in planning-related dialogues and capacity building activities. This paper is meant to spark an
overdue dialogue about how librarians and planners already collaborate in city, and how the two professions
might build more substantial and sustainable relationships with one another in the future.
References
 American Library Association. 2013. Public Libraries and Resilient city. Chicago, Ill.: American Library
Association.
 Jackson, Rose. 2005. Grey Literature and urban_planning: History and Accessibility. Publishing Research
Quarterly. 21, no. 1: 94-104.
 Rooney-Browne, Christine. 2009. Rising to the Challenge: A Look at the Role of Public Libraries in Times
of Recession. Library Review. 58, no. 5: 341-352.
 Williams, Pip, and Jane Edwards. 2011. Nowhere to Go and Nothing to Do: How Public Libraries Mitigate
the  impact of Parental Work and urban_planning on Young People. Australasian Public Libraries and
Information Services. 24, no. 4: 142-152.

Abstract Index #: 164
FEMININE PUBLIC SPHERE – A CASE FOR NURSING
Abstract System ID#: 139
Individual Paper
STAV, Tamy [Radboud University Nijmegen] t.stav@fm.ru.nl

This paper asks how the planning and design can make public space inviting for nursing women. As such, it relates
to the discussion on public space accessibility for different groups, practices and life styles. Its main assertion is
that the practice of nursing, if not supported actively as a public and open practice, may deem women to
exclusion and isolation. Following this assertion, is the claim that support of nursing women should be taken as
public responsibility. The design and planning of public spaces – the physical platform for social interaction – is
one facet of fulfilling this responsibility.
Building on preliminary research, this paper explores three contributing factors to the comfort of nursing women
in public space: peer support, a sense of protection or privacy, and cultural signifiers. It moves to explore possible
classification of public spaces that will inform us on the features of public spaces that contribute to women’s
ability to nurse in them. The classification is based on five scales, and tested through a visual research tool.
Nursing women were asked to point at surroundings that seem to them inviting or prohibiting to breastfeeding,
and to elaborate on what in these spaces triggered a sense of comfort, or discomfort. It is hoped that the results
may assist in creating guidelines for the planning and maintenance of public spaces which will make them more
accessible for the practice of nursing, and thus better suited to serve as a democratic meeting place.
References
 Boyer, K. 2012. Affect, corporeality and the limits of belonging: Breastfeeding in public in the
contemporary UK. Health and Place: 18, 552-560.
 Fenster, T. 2006. The right to the gendered city: different formations of belonging in everyday life.
Journal of Gender Studies, 14:3, 217-231.
 Carmona, M. 2010. Contemporary public space, part two: classification. Journal of Urban Design, 15:2,
157-173.
 Madanipour, A. 2003. Public and Private Spaces of the City. Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 165
NEGOTIATING DIVERSIFICATION: IMMIGRANT SETTLEMENT AND NEIGHBORHOOD CHANGE - THE CASE OF
GREEKTOWN IN BALTIMORE CITY, MARYLAND
Abstract System ID#: 207
Individual Paper
MATSUMOTO, Naka [University of Maryland at College Park] nakam@umd.edu
The recent and rapid influx of immigrants from Latin and Asian countries into the United States generates many
diversified neighborhood throughout the country (Singer 2004, Maly 2005). This phenomenon could create new
social dynamics in the neighborhood due to the differences among new and indigenous residents, and could
eventually lead to one of the possible scenarios: conflict, disassociation or collaboration. How planners,
policymakers and community organizers can create and maintain a diverse yet collaborative neighborhood is a
central challenge (Putnam 2007).
This paper investigates the new social relationships of the recent immigrants and indigenous residents in
Greektown in Baltimore City in Maryland. This small and rather isolated neighborhood was once a European
immigrant’s enclave in an old industrial city and still maintains the original ethnic characteristics. However in the
recent years, it is accepting Latino immigrants and now they consist of more than 30% of the total population.
Moreover, in addition to the Latino immigrants, there are new market-rate housing projects in the periphery of
the neighborhood that has brought new types of residents, mostly young and professionals who prefer living
closer to the downtown area. In this neighborhood, those three racially, ethnically and socio-economically
different groups are facing each other in their daily lives. They need to negotiate each other on various occasions
in order to make their living environment desirable to them. The paper illustrates those three groups’ social
relationships in the neighborhood that suggest the possibility of the future of the neighborhood (Massey 1995).
Neighborhoods change due to various factors, and each neighborhood has its own reason to change. Although no
single reason can fully explain neighborhood changes, scholars have vigorously discussed what causes

neighborhood changes. The term “neighborhood change” is often taken to mean demographic changes, such as
an increase or decrease of a particular race and ethnicity, because demographic change could be a key factor in
determining a neighborhood’s economic and physical character. However, it is often overlooked that changing
demographic character means changing social relationships among various groups in the neighborhood, which is
an important factor that changes neighborhood. The Socio-cultural Approach to neighborhood change has been
developed to explain how an individual’s adaptive activities that are based on his or her group’s culture, values,
and beliefs changes neighborhood (London 1980). The focus of the data collection is on knowing how their
cultural differences such as language, beliefs, customs and history are manifested in their daily lives and the
social relationships to the others in this small neighborhood.
The fieldwork conducted since the spring of 2012 includes interviewing approximately 60 residents, participant
observation and a survey. Some of the findings are:
1) Strong identification as immigrants or immigrants’ descendants by Greek Americans may create room to
accept new immigrants;
2) The Greek Americans lease the vacant houses to Latino immigrants and become economically
dependent upon each other;
3) Third-generation Greek American’s return to the neighborhood and bring new ideas of what an ethnic
neighborhood could be; 4) Latino immigrant’s second generation, who speak English, may become the
key persons to bridge the gap between different groups; and 5) The new residents, young and highly
educated, have an idea that “diversity is good” in their heads, which may help keep the neighborhood
diverse.
The paper further investigates the policy implication and how the planners can work with this racially, culturally
and socioeconomically diverse neighborhood in order to make neighborhood stay diverse yet collaborative in
this new era of immigration.
References
 Singer, A. (2004). “The Rise of New Immigrant Gateways” Living city Census Series, Center on Urban
and Metropolitan Policy, Feb 2004, The Brookings Institution
 Maly, M. T. (2005). Beyond Segregation - Multiracial and Multiethnic neighborhood in the United
States, Philadelphia, PA, Temple University Press
 Putnam, R. D. (2007). “E Pluribus Unum: Diversity and Community in the Twenty-first Century - The 2006
Johan Skytte Prize Lecture” Nordic Political Science Association p137-174
 Massey, D.S. (1995). “The New Immigration and Ethnicity in the United States” Population and
Development Review 21, no. 3 p.631-652
 London, B. (1980). "Gentrification as Urban Reinvasion: Some Preliminary Definitional and Theoretical
Considerations" in Shirley Bradway Laska & Daphne Spain (ed.) Back to the City. New York:
PergamonPress

Abstract Index #: 166
THE BOUNDARIES OF CULTURE: NEIGHBORHOOD BRANDING IN MULTI-ETHNIC LOS ANGELES
Abstract System ID#: 256
Individual Paper
COLLINS, Brady [University of California, Los Angeles] collins.bradyj@gmail.com
Academics often refer to the occurrence of a “spatial turn” in the social sciences, in which explorations of “space”
and “place” took increasing importance at the end of the 20th century in examining the evolution of society. As a
result, academic research from a number of fields began to focus on studies of “place attachment,” or how and
why people attach meaning to their environment. Designating particular neighborhood as ethnic or cultural
districts can be seen as an attempt to create place attachment, and yet, as has been shown, these efforts may
instigate conflict in multi-ethnic neighborhood. In this context, several questions can be raised about how

different uses of and experiences in urban space can lead to varying definitions of culture, community, and a
neighborhood’s boundaries.
With numerous overlapping and intersecting ethnic comminuty, Central Los Angeles is a prototypical site for
better understanding the new dynamics of place attachment, urban design, and community development in
multi-ethnic urban area. It is in these area that the notion of the ethnic enclave no longer holds. This
dissertation seeks to examine the ways in which multi-ethnic comminuty operationalize culture, negotiate
boundaries, and define their community and neighborhood. Specifically, my dissertation will address the
following research questions: How do multi-ethnic comminuty perceive of and experience shared urban space?
How do multi-ethnic comminuty occupying the same or overlapping neighborhood operationalize culture and
claim territory? Is there conflict/contestation generated because in shared spaces, and how is this resolved?
To answer these questions, this paper investigates the development and designation of four neighborhood in
Central Los Angeles--Little Armenia, Thai Town, Koreatown, and Little Bangladesh—through various ethnographic
methods. I employ open-ended, semi-structured interviews and cognitive mapping exercises with community
stakeholders, such as community-based organizations, resident organizations (Parent-Teacher Associations,
business associations, etc.), merchants, property owners, and cultural institutions, as well as representatives
from the local Neighborhood Council and city officials. Through discourse analysis of these interviews, I will
investigate the extent to which different groups identify with the neighborhood, if they develop sentiments of
territoriality of particular spaces or neighborhood institutions, and how these responses vary depending on the
respondent’s ethnicity, occupation, and other demographic indicators.
This research also involves conducting a visual ethnography of the social and built environment to examine the
ways in which culture is perceived of, mobilized, performed, represented, and negotiated in shared spaces. This
includes mapping the distribution of ethnic businesses (formal and informal), community organizations, sociocultural activities such as festivals and public art, and examples of cultural hybridities. Documenting how different
ethnic groups use, appropriate, or change the built environment for social, cultural, and economic activities, and
comparing these observations to my interview responses, will allow for a richer comparison between how the
neighborhood’s culture and boundaries are defined, and how they are experienced.
While this research is on-going, preliminary findings indicate significant differentiations in how overlapping ethnic
groups use and perceive of the same urban spaces, and a powerful influence of local politics in shaping
opportunities for certain stakeholders. By offering a more nuanced investigation of how culture is operationalized
in multi-ethnic urban area, I will demonstrate the need to scrutinize how city planners and policy makers define
the “neighborhood” or the “community”, and further unpack them as complex social, cultural, and psychological
systems by which individuals create meaning with and within their environment.
References
 Altman, Irwin, and Setha M. Low. (1992). Place attachment. New York: Plenum Press.
 Evans, G. (2001). Cultural Planning: An Urban Renaissance? London: Routledge.
 Low, Setha M. (2000). On the plaza: The politics of public space and culture. Austin: University of Texas
Press.
 Moncus, F. J., and Manuel Bassols. (2006). Culture, Urbanism and Planning. Aldershot, England:
Ashgate.
 Zukin, Sharon. (1995). The Cultures of city. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.

Abstract Index #: 167
PLANNING FOR INCLUSIVE QUEER SPACES IN THE YBOR CITY NEIGHBORHOOD OF TAMPA
Abstract System ID#: 381
Individual Paper
DOAN, Petra [Florida State University] pdoan@fsu.edu

Some scholars have suggested that gay village development follows a linear socio-economic process in which an
urban area in decline begins attracting gay residents and gay businesses, until the area becomes more attractive
to the wider (non-LGBTQ) population resulting in the neighborhood’s assimilation into the heterosexual
mainstream (Collins 2004). Frisch (2002) argues that this is not an inevitable process, but one which is triggered
by heterosexist planning interventions. Doan and Higgins (2011) found that in Atlanta municipal efforts to
stimulate redevelopment along Peachtree Street in Atlanta, combined with a studied neglect of the Midtown
gayborhood, pushed gay clubs and institutions away from the historic LGBTQ area in Midtown to more peripheral
neighborhoods. In effect planning’s refusal to recognize Midtown as a Gayborhood enabled other efforts to
cleanse neighborhood and make them safe for capital investment (Doan 2011).
This paper examines the role of urban_planning in the evolution of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgendered, and
queer (LGBTQ) commercial and residential area in the Ybor City neighborhood of Tampa. Ybor City thrived in the
late nineteenth century as a home for immigrant workers in the cigar industry, but after the Second World War
many residents began moving out of Ybor City leading to a period of decline (Lastra 2006) followed by a series of
economic booms and then busts. Historically when rents have been low in Ybor City, LGBTQ individuals have
been attracted to the area along with artists and other bohemians. During the most recent economic recession,
the GaYbor District Coalition was created to promote Ybor City as Tampa’s most LGBTQ friendly neighborhood.
This paper explores the role of urban_planning in stimulating development at certain points and at other times in
constraining the development process. The paper explore whether planners in Tampa acted to enable and
preserve this unique neighborhood (including its LGBTQ character) or made decisions that devastated those same
areas.
This paper uses qualitative methods to explore the role of planning in the development of LGBTQ comminuty in
Ybor City and Tampa using key informants knowledgeable about the various waves of gentrification in Ybor City
and the role of planned municipal actions to stimulate or mitigate those urban developments. Other informants
from the Ybor City Chamber of Commerce and GaYbor District Coalition provide a business perspective. Other
input from a snowball sampling strategy of LGBTQ residents of the GaYbor area as well as nearby neighborhood
rounds out the data collection from the grassroots.
Research questions that are addressed in this study include:
1. What kinds of planning measures were used to stimulate urban reinvestments in Ybor? Were they
successful? Did planning officials take action to preserve well-established gay area or fuel rapid
redevelopment?
2. How might planning create a more inclusive and stable GaYbor District without the related displacement
effects on less well organized comminuty of minorities and immigrants?
References
 Collins, A. (2004). Sexual dissidence, enterprise and assimilation: bedfellows in urban regeneration,
Urban Studies 41, 9: 1789-1806.
 Doan, P.L. (Ed.). (2011). Queerying Planning: Challenging Heteronormative Assumptions and Reframing
Planning Practice. Ashgate: Farnham, UK.
 Doan, P.L. & Higgins, H. (2011). The Demise of Queer Space? Resurgent Gentrification and LGBT
Neighborhoods. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 31, 6-25.
 Frisch, M. (2002). Planning as a heterosexist project. Journal of Planning Education and Research 21:
254-66.
 Lastra, Frank. (2006). Ybor City: The Making of a Landmark Town. University of Tampa Press.

Abstract Index #: 168
PLANNING FOR THE LGBTQ COMMUNITY - MOVING BEYOND QUEER SPACE
Abstract System ID#: 382
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session
DOAN, Petra [Florida State University] pdoan@fsu.edu

ANACKER, Katrin [George Mason University] kanacker@gmu.edu
FRISCH, Michael [University of Missouri, Kansas City] frischm@umkc.edu
GOH, Kian [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] kiangoh@mit.edu
MARTINEZ, Arianna [City University of New York - LaGuardia Community College] amartinez@lagcc.cuny.edu
WESLEY, Joan [Jackson State University] joan.m.wesley@jsums.edu
WHITTEMORE, Andrew [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] awhittemore@gmail.com
WINKLE, Curt [University of Illinois at Chicago] cwinkle@uic.edu
This roundtable is part of the Inclusion Network established as an informal ACSP interest group of LGBTQ scholars
and allies. The participants on the Roundtable all contributed chapters to the forthcoming publication from
Routledge: Planning and LGBTQ comminuty: the Need for Inclusive Queer Spaces edited by Petra Doan. The
roundtable participants will discuss next steps in the ongoing effort to create more inclusive spaces for LGBTQ
people. Participants will be asked to share briefly on one of the following topics:
How can we ensure that LGBTQ neighborhood are preserved and protected in the face of sweeping
gentrification trends that threaten existing area?
How can we ensure that planning for LGBTQ spaces is fully inclusive of all LGBTQ individuals and comminuty,
especially those comminuty of color and other marginalized groups that are not well represented in
mainstream gay and lesbian groups?
While many people and especially straight allies may feel that recognition of marriage rights will close the book
on discrimination concerns, what kinds of LGBTQ planning concerns continue to need attention?
Moderator: Petra Doan
Participants (in alphabetic order)
Katrin Anacker, George Mason University
Michael Frisch, University of Missouri Kansas City
Kian GOH, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Arianna Martinez, LaGuardia Community College
Joan Marshall Wesley, Jackson State University
Andrew Whittemore, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Curt Winkle, University of Illinois Chicago
References
 Doan, P.L. (Ed.). (2011). Queerying Planning: Challenging Heteronormative Assumptions and Reframing
Planning Practice. Ashgate: Farnham, UK.
 Doan, P.L. Forthcoming April 2015. Planning and LGBTQ comminuty: The Need for Inclusive Queer
Spaces. New York: Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 169
THE EFFECTS OF GENDER policy ON PLANNING PRACTICE: ANALYSIS OF THE QUOTA LAW IN COLOMBIA
Abstract System ID#: 393
Individual Paper
LOZANO-TORRES, Yancili [Florida State University] yl11j@my.fsu.edu, presenting author, primary author
DOAN, Petra [Florida State University] pdoan@fsu.edu
More than one hundred countries have adopted gender quotas aiming, in a way or another, to increase women’s
representation (Chen, 2010; Franceschet, Krook, & Piscopo, 2012). Gender quotas are usually more focused on
women’s symbolic representation rather than on women’s gains in terms of equity (Meier and Lombardo, 2013;
Chen, 2010). In this way, most studies of gender quotas concentrate their analysis on the number of women
entering political offices. A few studies look at the effects that an increased number of women within political

offices have on policy and strategies addressing women’s issues (Franceschet, Krook, & Piscopo, 2012).
However, scant attention has been given to the effects of gender quotas on planning practice. Thus, using the
quota law enacted in Colombia in 2000, this paper examines the extent to which local planning offices have
incorporated the quota law and the effects that it has had on women’s issues including structural changes within
the public sector and society.
Contrary to the experience of most other countries, Colombia’s quota law does not focus on elected positions,
but targets high level decision-making positions within the bureaucracy at the national, regional and local level.
Reports of the implementation of the law indicate that there is a high degree of compliance at the minimum level
of the law at the national and regional level and in many of the provincial capitals. However this study examines
on the Pacific region of Colombia where percentage of women in high positions was almost fifty percent for
2014. The paper provides a detailed appraisal of the report on quota fulfillment for the region, during the past
ten years, and analyzes the variations within the region. Additionally, this paper reports on an assessment of the
four main city on the Colombian Pacific Region (Buenaventura, Guapi, Quibdo and Tumaco) contrasting the
effect of the law on local planning offices’ composition and their plans. The methods used in this paper include
archival analysis of planning office documentation on the recruitment of women and qualitative interviews with
officials working at the planning offices. The research questions include: Will an evaluation of the local level
planning offices in this region mirror trends at the national or regional level? Are women involved in highdecision making in the Pacific region, and if so, are they able to address women’s issues?
References
 Chen, L. (2010). Do gender quotas influence women's representation and policy? The European Journal
of Comparative Economics, 7(1), 13-60.
 Franceschet, S., Krook, M. L., & Piscopo, J. M. (Eds.). (2012). The Impact of Gender Quotas. Oxford
University Press.
 Meier, P., & Lombardo, E. (2013). Gender quotas, gender mainstreaming and gender relations in politics.
Political Science, 65(1), 46-62.

Abstract Index #: 170
IT IS ALL IN THE MIX? -THE SPATIAL DIMENSIONS OF ETHNIC RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATIONAbstract System ID#: 413
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session
HA, Hui Jeong [The Seoul Institute] huijeongha@si.re.kr
In the 1990s, a remarkable number of foreigners came to Korea during the development of Korea at that time,
and we shared many regions with southeastern laborers, Chosunjok and Saetumin, compound with manifold
nationalities and ethnicities. Particularly, Korean-Chinese constituted 33% of all foreigners. Their absolute
numbers were 430,000 people. This information is based on data from the Ministry of Justice in 2009. We also
focus on the point that illustrates new issues and cultures by Korean-Chinese. Especially in the case of Seoul,
among all foreigners who live in the city (Seoul statistics from 2009) 75 % are Korean-Chinese. Korean-Chinese
have a nationality that is represented by China. However, their parents are Korean, and therefore they have
Korean nationality as well. From the current situation, we cannot ignore Korean-Chinese anymore in the city as
an ethnic minority. However, we do not consider them so that this situation makes them not foreigners or native
Korean. In present, the biggest social issue is that Korean-Chinese have committed numberless brutal crimes in
Seoul. Therefore, I decide to research the spatial problems to Korean-Chinese in Seoul for urban plan to KoreanChinese.
The aim of this project is to find a segregation index for a better understanding of the relationship between
Korean-Chinese and Seoul as the region of their habitat and work places. After a decade of lively debate on the
nature of residential segregation and how to measure it, Duncan and Duncan (1955) concocted a segregation
index focusing on dissimilarity. For more than 20 years afterward, the dissimilarity index severed as the standard
segregation measure. It measured spatial segregation between social groups such as ethnic minorities. After

many years, researchers sparked new theories on the measurement of segregation, as they had different
definitions of segregation. Therefore, some researchers started to make new indices to measure segregation and
evaluated many other indices. Massey and Denton (1988) attempted to bring some order to the field by
undertaking a systematic methodological evaluation of 20 potential measures of residential segregation, as
identified in a survey of research. As a result, they classified five dimensions of segregation indexes. These
dimensions explain different aspects of segregation.
I can expect three things from this project. First, this study provides way to create policy pertaining to KoreanChinese who live in Seoul. We have little recognition of them compared to other foreign groups, as their
appearances are similar to that of a native Korean. Secondly, in case of the Korean-Chinese residents, they are
often illegal laborers in Korea. They have several reasons for doing this, even considering that the Korea industry
structure operates via an exclusive hire system. These results could be used to motivate the Korean-Chinese to
live legally. Not only can we understand and recognize our exclusive attitude, but this research result can resolve
problems that can lead to conflict between Korean-Chinese and native Koreans. Third, Seoul strives to be global
city in the world, as a global city is a condition of developing city brand value. However, there should be a
challenge to segregation between natives and foreigners. This research serves to elucidate Korean attitudes to
foreigners as represented by segregation and physical isolation of these groups in the city. This segregation
appears as a wall to them. Clearly, these circumstances assist with an understanding of the demographic flow and
uniqueness of the Korean diaspora.
References
 Joe T. Darden and Sameh M. Kamel. 2002. The spatial and socioeconomic analysis of first nation people
in toronto CMA, The Canadian Journal of Native Studies, XXII: 239-267.
 Douglas S. Massey and Nancy A. Denton .1988. The Dimensions of Residential Segregation. Social Forces,
67: 281-315
 George G. 2001.On the Nature of Neighbourhood, Urban Studies, 38: 2111–2124
 Eun Mee Kim and Jean S. 2007. Kang. Seoul as a Global City with Ethnic Villages, KOREA JOURNAL,12:6598
 JU¨ Rgen F, George G and SAKO M. 2003. Neighbourhood Effects on Social Opportunities: The European
and American Research and Policy Context, Housing Studies, 18:797-806

Abstract Index #: 171
WELCOMING IMMIGRANTS AND THE REACTIVATION OF THE URBAN GROWTH MACHINE IN RUST BELT city
Abstract System ID#: 471
Individual Paper
HARWOOD, Stacy [University of Illinois] sharwood@illinois.edu
The foreign-born population (immigrants and refugee) is reemerging as an important part of the urban growth
machine. Despite anti-immigrant sentiment across the nation, local politicians, business leaders, and government
officials from rust belts city openly welcome the foreign-born because of the potential to reverse decades of
population decline and revitalize the local economy. While these city are perusing a plethora of strategies to
attract and retain the foreign-born, this paper focuses the ways in which the foreign-born population has
reactivated the urban growth machine in Dayton, Ohio.
Urban political economy helps us makes sense of the process of urban policy making in relation to growth. But
much of the literature about the urban growth machine assumes entrepreneurs are White and native born. Light
(2002) responds to this assumption showing how immigrants are not passive players, rather active agents and
take “conscious entrepreneurial initiative” in the urban growth machine (p. 225). This reconceptualization
provides a frame to understand the recent and enthusiastic response of local governments, business leaders, and
others to welcoming immigrants and creating immigrant friendly city. Some of the most comprehensive plans
have emerged from rust belt city (Harwood and Lee 2015).

Dayton has embarked on an ambitious plan to be immigrant-friendly. Dayton’s population has been declining
since the 1960s, from a peak of over 262,000 to just over 141,000. Although Dayton’s population—52 percent
White, 43 percent Black and 3 percent Hispanic (2010 Census) —is in decline, the immigrant population continues
to grow. That sliver of the total population includes immigrants and refugees from more than 100 countries,
including Russia, Nigeria, India, Turkey, Libya, the Philippines, and Mexico. The Welcome Dayton plan lays out a
framework for government, businesses, schools, and civic organizations to act inclusively, integrate immigrants
into the community, and celebrate diversity.
This paper will draw from fieldwork in Dayton including interviews with city officials and immigrant
entrepreneurs; observation of community meetings; site visits in neighborhood with a concentration of property
development driven by foreign-born residents; content analysis of city documents and website related to
Welcome Dayton; content analysis of media sources such as newspaper, videos, and other materials covering the
growth stimulated by the foreign-born population.
References
 Harwood, Stacy and Lee, Sang. 2015. Immigrant-Friendly Community Plans:
 Rustbelt Efforts to Attract and Retain Immigrants, Chapter 10 in city & the Politics of Difference:
Multiculturalism and Diversity in urban_planning, edited by Burayidi, Michael, University of Toronto
Press.
 Light, Ivan. 2002. Immigrant Place Entrepreneurs in Los Angeles, 1970-99. International Journal of Urban
and Regional Research, 26 (2): 215-228.
 Molotch, Harvey. 1993. The Political Economy of Growth Machines. Journal of Urban Affairs, 15 (1): 2953.

Abstract Index #: 172
THE RIGHT TO SUBURBIA: REDEVELOPMENT AND RESISTANCE ON THE URBAN EDGE
Abstract System ID#: 607
Pre-organized Session: Spatial Justice in a Changing Metropolis
LUNG-AMAM, Willow [University of Maryland at College Park] lungamam@umd.edu, presenting author, primary
author
MENDEZ, Michael [University of California, Berkeley] mendezm@berkeley.edu
HUERTA, Alvaro [University of California, Berkeley] alvarohuerta6@gmail.com
SANDOVAL, Gerardo [University of Oregon] gsando@uoregon.edu
Suburbia has always been a site of social struggle. While not well documented in the literature, it has served as
an important space upon which marginalized groups have registered claims to equal rights, citizenship, and a
more just distribution of resources. For much of the twentieth century, these battles were largely fought over
access to housing, schools, jobs, and the promised suburban “good life.” But in the past few decades, the tenor of
these debates has changed. With the unprecedented movement of minorities, immigrants, and the poor to the
urban periphery, the battles now taking shape are about far more “urban” issues, like gentrification and
displacement.
This paper documents clashes over such issues in low-income Latino and Asian immigrant comminuty in the
Washington, DC suburbs. It shows the intersection of debates over displacement with the rapid transformation of
the region’s suburbs into more compact, dense, mixed-use, and walkable comminuty, especially those near
transit. In case studies of two comminuty undergoing new transit-oriented “retrofits,” the paper probes
questions about the broader  impact of contemporary processes of suburban spatial transformation on socially
and economically disadvantaged comminuty. It also explores the significance of suburban social movements for
achieving more equitable development and redevelopment practices.

Abstract Index #: 173
FORMATION OF A LATINO GRASSROOTS MOVEMENT: THE ASSOCIATION OF LATIN AMERICAN GARDENERS OF
LOS ANGELES CHALLENGES CITY HALL
Abstract System ID#: 728
Pre-organized Session: Spatial Justice in a Changing Metropolis
HUERTA, Alvaro [California State Polytechnic University, Pomona] amhuerta@cpp.edu
When the City of Los Angeles banned gas-powered leaf blowers in 1996, the law sparked one of the most
dynamic grassroots campaigns by Latino immigrants in recent history. Latino immigrant gardeners, working with
a small group of Chicana/o activists, organized the Association of Latin American Gardeners of Los Angeles
(ALAGLA), which pressured city leaders to reverse the ban. ALAGLA pursued its objectives by engaging in the
political process, taking direct action, advocating technological adaptations, and reframing the gardeners and
their tools in a positive light. Turning public opinion in their favor, they persuaded city leaders to void the
draconian elements of the ordinance, which included a misdemeanor charge, a $1,000 fine, and jail time for
gardeners using the blowers. ALAGLA’s movement can be compared in some ways to earlier immigrantorganizing efforts by organized labor, notably the United Farm Workers and the Service Employees International
Union’s Justice for Janitors campaign, but it is also distinguished from them by ALAGLA’s non-bureaucratic
grassroots structure. The association’s campaign for social and economic justice shows the potential for collective
action among marginalized immigrant workers and petty entrepreneurs in the informal economy.
References
 Huerta, Alvaro. 2011. “Examining the Perils and Promises of an Informal Niche in a Global City: A Case
Study of Mexican Immigrant Gardeners in Los Angeles.” PhD diss, University of California, Berkeley.
 Huerta, Alvaro. 2007. “Looking Beyond ‘Mow, Blow and Go’: A Case Study of Mexican Immigrant
Gardeners in Los Angeles.” Berkeley Planning Journal 20: 1 – 23.
 Cameron, Christopher David Ruiz. 2000. “The Rakes of Wrath: Urban Agricultural Workers and the
Struggle Against Los Angeles’ Ban on Gas-Power Leaf Blowers.” University of California Davis Law Review
33: 1087 – 1103.
 Castells, Manuel and Alejandro Portes. 1989. “World Underneath: The Origins, Dynamics, and Effects of
the Informal Economy.” In The Informal Economy: Studies in Advanced and Less Developed Countries,
eds. Alejandro Portes, Manuel Castells, and Lauren A. Benton, 11 - 37. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
University.
 Sassen, Saskia. 1994. “The Informal Economy: Between New Developments an Old Regulations.” The
Yale Law Journal 103 (8): 2289 – 2304.

Abstract Index #: 174
CLIMATE CHANGE FROM THE STREETS: COMMUNITY ACTION FOR GLOBAL HEALTH IMPACT
Abstract System ID#: 753
Pre-organized Session: Spatial Justice in a Changing Metropolis
MENDEZ, Michael [University of California, Berkeley] mendezm@berkeley.edu
As the eighth-largest economy in the world and the only state in the U.S. to adopt a comprehensive program of
regulatory and market-based mechanisms to achieve reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, California
represents an important site of inquiry. With the passage of Assembly Bill 32, the Global Warming Solutions Act
of 2006, the state has become a world leader on climate change science and policy innovation. How California
achieves GHG reductions while addressing the needs of socially vulnerable populations has important policy
implications worldwide.
In this paper, I examine how the legitimization of a local scale of climate change has been highly contested in the
State Capitol, as environment justice advocates attempt to “rescale” California’s landmark Global Warming
Solutions Act to focus on direct benefits to disadvantaged comminuty. I analyze this debate through the lens of

a four-year environment justice campaign to enact “cap-and-dividend” legislation, better known as a Climate
Change Community Benefits Fund. The adopted legislation mandates that a dividend (or rebate) be invested from
a portion of the billions of dollars in cap-and-trade auction revenues in comminuty most impacted by air
pollution. Through a combination of theoretical and policy-relevant research, this paper highlights the emerging
epistemologies and scales of climate change in California as articulated by social movements, experts and
subnational governments.
References
 Niemeier, Deb, Beamish, Tom, Kendall, Alicia, Grattet, Ryken, London, Jonathan, de la Pena, Carolyn,
Sze, Julie (2012). Characterizing the  impact of Uncertainty in the Policy Process: Climate Science, Policy
Construction, and Local Governance Decisions. In Geerlings, Harry, Sfhiftan, Yoram, and Stead, Dominic
(Eds), Transition Towards Sustainable Mobility: The Role of Instruments, Individuals and Institutions. UK:
Ashgate, 2012.
 Pastor, Manuel, Shonokoff, Morello-Frosch, Sadd, Jim. (2009). Minding the Climate Gap: Implications of
Environmental Health Inequities for Mitigation policy in California environment Justice, vol. 2, no. 4,
2009.
 Pitt, Damian. (2010a). Harnessing community energy: the keys to climate mitigation policy adoption in
US municipalities. Local Environment 15(8); pp. 717-729.
 Rosenzweig, Cynthia, Solecki, William, Hammer, Stephen, and Mehrotra, Hammer (2010a). city lead
the way in climate-change action. Nature, 467: pgs. 909-911.

Abstract Index #: 175
#RESISTANCE TO STREET HARASSMENT: CONTEXTUALIZING ON-LINE ACTIONS IN A NEW ERA OF WOMEN’S
RESISTANCE IN PUBLIC SPACE
Abstract System ID#: 763
Individual Paper
FLORES, Nina [University of California, Los Angeles] nina.flores@gmail.com
Across the globe women are targets of street harassment — unwanted in-person comments or physical contact,
usually sexual in nature (Bowman, 1993) — that limits their ability to access public spaces with the same freedom
and ease as their male counterparts. During the past few years, increasing media attention and consciousness
raising about street harassment has produced renewed interest in how women experience city, and how to
combat this issue in comminuty. In 2014, the organization Stop Street Harassment conducted the first ever
national survey on the issue, revealing that 65% of women had experienced street harassment, and that people
of color and those identifying as LGBTQ are disproportionately affected. The data signals a widespread and
pressing safety issue in public space.
Looking back to the 1960s, the groundwork of the women’s movement provides a framework for understanding
both individual resistance and collective organizing against street harassment. Looking ahead, social media and
online forums are increasing options for resistance in two ways. First, virtual platforms allow for responses to
harassment without requiring direct confrontation of harassers, thereby avoiding the risk of in-person escalation.
Second, using social media as a tool of online activism (Sutton & Pollock, 2000) expands the reach of antiharassment organizing efforts. This presents a unique opportunity to study the virtual world as an added public
space for resistance.
Building on existing research on gender and the right to the city (Fenster, 2005), and social movements and social
media (Castells, 2013), I examine how virtual public spaces are being used to address and resist street
harassment on-the-ground. My research is motivated by the idea that public space is profoundly gendered, with
significant consequences for women. This paper is guided by three research questions: (1) How is twitter being
used to document and resist street harassment in public space? What can these virtual narratives tell us about
experiences with street harassment? (2) How is twitter being used to contribute to the growing momentum

against street harassment? (3) Where does this fit within the history of the women’s movement, and more
specifically, women’s resistance in public space?
My paper uses a qualitative approach to analyze data from the social media platform twitter. Over the course of
three months I collected tweets related to street harassment based on a series of keywords and selected
hashtags. Tweets are analyzed as micro-narratives, sorted by usage type (Evans-Cowley & Griffin, 2011), and
compared to a timeline of street harassment related events and news stories from the same time period.
Historical research contextualizes the current actions within the broader context of women’s resistance.
Although my research is ongoing, my preliminary findings indicate that tweets offer a rare, unsolicited window
into lived experiences with street harassment, potentially offering organizers, practitioners, and researchers a
new way for understanding and addressing a complex and pressing urban issue. Additionally, this research
provides an example of how the women’s resistance in public space continues in the era of social media.
References
 Bowman, C. G. (1993). Street harassment and the informal ghettoization of women. Harvard Law
Review, 517-580.
 Castells, M. (2013). Networks of outrage and hope: Social movements in the Internet age. John Wiley &
Sons.
 Evans-Cowley, J. S., & Griffin, G. (2011). Micro-participation: the role of microblogging in planning.
Available at SSRN 1760522.
 Fenster, T. (2005). The right to the gendered city: different formations of belonging in everyday life.
Journal of Gender Studies, 14(3), 217-231.
 Sutton, J., & Pollock, S. (2000). Online activism for women's rights. CyberPsychology & Behavior, 3(5),
699-706.

Abstract Index #: 176
TRANSIT-ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT AND EQUITY IN LATINO neighborhood: A COMPARATIVE CASE STUDY
OF MACARTHUR PARK (LOS ANGELES) AND FRUITVALE (OAKLAND)
Abstract System ID#: 786
Pre-organized Session: Spatial Justice in a Changing Metropolis
SANDOVAL, Gerardo [University of Oregon] gsando@uoregon.edu
This case study compares and contrasts urban revitalization efforts and the equity  impact of large transitoriented development (TOD) projects in two low-income Latino immigrant comminuty (Cervero, 1997; Dittmar
and Ohland 2004). The study highlights how Latino immigrant comminuty were able to transform these
redevelopment projects into immigrant-led revitalization efforts that lead to neighborhood benefits. The TOD
projects include the MacArthur Park Metro, a subway station in Los Angeles that has spurred revitalization
(Sandoval, 2010), and the Fruitvale Transit Village, a mixed-use development project adjacent to a Bay Area Rapid
Transit District (BART) station in Oakland, California (Kirkpatrick, 2007).
The study asks: How can TOD projects serve as catalysts for community revitalization in low-income immigrant
Latino neighborhood? The research relied heavily on in-depth interviews, neighborhood observations, and
descriptive demographic information capturing neighborhood changes, including 60 interviews with planners,
community leaders, activists, developers, and other stakeholders. The neighborhood’ community plans,
transportation plans, and redevelopment plans were also studied.
This research reveals how, under what circumstances, and through what mechanisms Latino immigrant
communities transform these large scale transportation projects into community revitalization efforts which
benefited their neighborhood. The findings reveal that by incorporating endogenous neighborhood
characteristics, TOD has the potential to improve economic development, affordable housing, social services,
community engagement, and creative place making in disadvantaged neighborhood.

References
 Cervero, R. and Bernick, M. (1997) Transit Villages in the 21st Century, McGraw-Hill, New York.
 Dittmar, H. and Ohland, G. (2004) The New Transit Town: Best Practices in Transit-Oriented
Development, Island Press, Washington D.C
 Kirkpatrick, O. (2007). The Two “Logics” of Community Development: neighborhood, Markets, and
Community Development Corporations, Politics and Society, 35(2): 329-359.
 Sandoval, G. (2010) Immigrants and the Revitalization of Los Angeles: Development and Change in
MacArthur Park, Cambria Press, New York.

Abstract Index #: 177
THE TEXAS FREEDOM COLONY DIASPORA: THE ROLE OF FOUNDATIONAL STORIES IN AFRICAN AMERICAN
PLACEMAKING & PRESERVATION IN EAST TEXAS
Abstract System ID#: 804
Individual Paper
ROBERTS, Andrea [University of Texas at Austin] aroberts318@netzero.net
From 1870 to 1890, in the shadow of Reconstruction and the violent nadir of American race relations that
followed, former slaves founded more than 500 “Freedom Colonies” or Freedmen’s Towns across Texas. Even
though a variety of factors led to the depopulation of many Freedom Colonies, descendants of the original
settlers—including those who no longer live in these settlements—continue to nurture their stewardship of the
original land through annual celebrations and oral tradition, even as physical manifestations of place dissipate.
The aim of this study is to gain insight into how dispersed descendants’ diasporic attachments to Freedom
Colonies shape their identities and catalyze their planning and historic preservation activities. The study is based
on the hypothesis that memory, manifested in foundational or origin stories, provide meaning and thus serve to
sustain attachment to Freedom Colonies. Second, research suggests that Freedom Colony foundational stories
reveal a lost history of planning practice. And third, the study proposes that stories of African American
placemaking and land stewardship can fill gaps between formal planning practice and informal conceptions of
identity and geography.
The focus of the study is a network of Freedom Colony descendants and comminuty across three counties in
Deep East Texas, which are linked by collective memory, kinship, and cooperative stewardship of their
communities. First, archival and historical research was conducted to document how formal planning discourse
and practice has defined the cultural landscape, historical geography, and planning issues in the region. Then,
stories of settlement origins, cultural conservation practice, and contemporary planning issues were collected
using ethnographic methods. During interviews, annual events called homecomings, and settlement tours,
descendants shared the values and memories associated with settlement origins, as well as the influence of
foundational stories on their current preservation and planning activities. To explore the significance of story to
settlements on a larger scale, a summer event was held in partnership with Freedom Colony descendants,
regional planning agencies, and the Texas Historical Commission during which settlement descendants from
across the state discussed planning and preservation projects rooted in their settlement heritage. The event
concluded with a dialogue between descendants and practitioners regarding the optimum role for formal
planning and preservation organizations in shaping Freedom Colonies’ futures.
Findings from this research will contribute to planning theory, pedagogy, and practice by revealing new
approaches to identifying and addressing gaps between conceptualizations of vulnerabilities, strengths, and
priorities in formal planning and preservation, and informal notions of identity, cultural geography, and planning
often invisible to students and practitioners. Learning the various ways descendants engage in “productive
nostalgia” to maintain attachment to settlements can shed light on how future planners can perform fieldwork in
a reflexive manner. The study’s deep description of early African American settlement origins, placemaking
approaches, sustainability networks, and planning methods (absent from current planning history) expands our

conceptions of what constitutes planning and the variety of resources available to address issues in “invisible”
communities such as these. Finally, findings and action steps proposed during public dialogues may constitute a
nascent, grassroots Freedom Colony agenda that may serve to address power and equity issues more broadly in
planning and preservation.
References
 Connerton, Paul. How societies remember. Cambridge University Press, 1989.
 Gordon, Edmund T., and Mark Anderson. “The African Diaspora: Toward an Ethnography of Diasporic
Identiﬁcation.” Journal of American Folklore 112, no. 445 (1999): 282–96
 McKittrick, Katherine, and Clyde Adrian Woods, eds. Black Geographies and the Politics of Place.
Toronto, ON: Between the Lines, 2007.
 Sandercock, Leonie. “Out of the Closet: The Importance of Stories and Storytelling in Planning Practice.”
Planning Theory & Practice 4, no. 1 (2003): 11–28.
 Sitton, Thad, and James H. Conrad. “Freedom Colonies Independent Black Texans in the Time of Jim
Crow,” 2005.

Abstract Index #: 178
DIVERSITY FOR SALE: WELCOMING IMMIGRANTS AS A PATH TO GLOBAL CONNECTIONS
Abstract System ID#: 1237
Individual Paper
LEE, Sang [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] sanglee7@illinois.edu
How do city in the Midwest compete in an increasingly global economy? And what role can ethnic and racial
diversity play in making a city competitive globally? city across the Midwest have started to tackle these
questions and increasing insecurities about the success of their city through a strategy of immigration
attraction. Immigrants are seen not only as economic self-starters, but also as possible connections to the global
economy (Zhou & Tseng, 2001; Steinhardt, 2013). Indianapolis, Indiana, is a city embracing the idea that
immigration will foster economic development and city growth. Using qualitative methods and archival research,
this paper examines the Sister city International program employed by Indianapolis to utilize immigrant
transnational connections. This program has been used to justify investment into certain immigrant populations
in Indianapolis and to initiate specific relationships with strategic city around the world. What emerges are
intentional efforts by Indianapolis to use local immigrants to build political and economic connections outside the
Midwest - to countries like India, China, and Brazil. Local immigrant community-based organizations (CBOs) are
vital to the success of the International Sister city program, both abroad and locally in Indianapolis. CBOs are
often an integral part of emerging immigrant civil societies and play an important role in addressing their needs
within the community (Theodore & Martin, 2007; de Leon, 2012). In the Sister city International program,
immigrant leadership functions as facilitators, representatives, and sellers of Indianapolis’s multicultural and
‘global’ city status. However, this strategy of utilizing diversity as an economic development tool creates an
idealized immigrant subject; immigrants from nations with strong global economic positions are idealized and
immigrants from other nations are not included in this framework. This research is of particular importance in
understanding the ways in which diversity is constructed as an asset for comminuty, and the limitations of
development oriented planning in addressing a diversifying population in city.
References
 de Leon, E. (2012). Community-Based Asian American and Pacific Islander Organizations and Immigrant
Integration. AAPI Nexus, 10(1), 41-58.
 Steinhardt, R. (2013). Promoting economic prosperity by welcoming immigrants. comminuty &
Banking, 24(3), 8-10.
 Theodore, N., & Martin, N. (2007). Migrant civil society: New voices in the struggle over community
development. Journal of Urban Affairs, 29(3), 269-287.
 Zhou, Y., & Tseng, Y.F. (2001). “Regrounding the ‘ungrounded empires’: Localization as the geographical
catalyst for transnationalism.” Global Networks, 1(2), 131–154.

Abstract Index #: 179
MIGRATION AND ADAPTAION IN OCEANIA
Abstract System ID#: 936
Poster
BUDGE, Juliette [University of Hawaii at Manoa] jbudge@hawaii.edu
There are many uncertainties in the future for planning, climate change being a major one, but two trends that
are absolutely going to continue are urbanization, and migration. In Oceania, these trends converge and lead to
complex questions about how places change and how people are accommodated and adapt to more urbanized
environments.
While the majority of climate change research is not focused on the Pacific, there is consensus that islands in
Oceania will be among the most vulnerable to the effects of climate change. The challenges of climate change to
policies around immigration are evident in Oceania and it is incumbent on nations like New Zealand and the
United States to prepare for greater numbers of Pacific Island migrants (Barnett, 2003).
Hawaii is a receiving community for migrants from Oceania, and most recently, the majority have been from
Micronesia. Because the island nations that comprise Micronesia are mostly lower-elevation atolls, increased
migration in the future is very likely. This research proposes that the policy around migration should not just
be about who comes and how, but also the more nuanced dynamics of migrant comminuty in the receiving
countries. For planners to be more aware of how migrants adapt is critical. Currently, concepts and designs for
spaces and their uses within city rest largely on professional assumptions about the spaces value in the social
world. These assumptions are founded on culturally specific perspectives for way-finding and spatial models
(Shore, 2014).
This research describes how Pacific women in diaspora create spaces for themselves and their families in a dense
and diverse urban environment on Oahu while considering how migrants are formally planned for both in
physical designs and through public policy. Using qualitative methods, a cohort of women who had recently
migrated from Chuuk, Micronesia share their experiences in the city and the ways they navigate, use, and shape
space. Located in the Kalihi-Palama neighborhood on the fringe of Honolulu, the community of diasporic women
provided an opportunity to understand their acculturation of space and their social practices in the city. To
understand the dynamics of the receiving community planning documents were analyzed and planners,
organizational actors and policy makers were interviewed. These two strands of inquiry resulted in a more
holistic view of the context and experience of migration in the urban environment on Oahu.
Findings build a foundation for understanding of the processes of adaptation and the dynamics of how migrant
communities root themselves. These insights allow planners to be more aware and inclusive of culturally
patterned uses and perceptions of space, ultimately leading to greater equity, and support for migrants.
Ultimately, this research suggests that a heightened awareness and responsiveness to migration is not just a
moral imperative, but can result in larger gains for receiving comminuty.
References
 Sandercock, L. (2000). When strangers become neighbours: Managing city of difference. Planning
Theory & Practice, 1(1), 13-30.
 Füssel, H. M. (2007). Adaptation planning for climate change: concepts, assessment approaches, and key
lessons. Sustainability science, 2(2), 265-275.
 Bulkeley, H., Schroeder, H., Janda, K., Zhao, J., Armstrong, A., Chu, S. Y., & Ghosh, S. (2009). city and
climate change: the role of institutions, governance and urban_planning. Change, 28, 30.
 Adger, W. N., Barnett, J., Brown, K., Marshall, N., & O'Brien, K. (2013). Cultural dimensions of climate
change  impact and adaptation. Nature Climate Change, 3(2), 112-117.
 Brah, A. (2005). Cartographies of diaspora: Contesting identities. Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 180
EVALUATING STRATEGIES TO PROMOTE PARK USE IN LOW-INCOME MINORITY comminuty: IMPLICATIONS
FOR ADDRESSING HEALTH INEQUITIES
Abstract System ID#: 960
Individual Paper
DAS, Kirti [University of Minnesota] dasxx054@umn.edu, presenting author, primary author
FRENCH, Simone [University of Minnesota] frenc001@umn.edu
FAN, Yingling [University of Minnesota] yingling@umn.edu
WOLFSON, Julian [University of Minnesota] julianw@umn.edu
Parks and trails play a crucial role in the health of local populations by providing residents of all skill levels with
opportunities to be physically active through free and low-cost activities. In addition, parks have also been found
to benefit health by reducing stress and promoting a general sense of well-being. Their importance is further
augmented in low-income minority comminuty where residents have limited means to access other leisuretime activity options. While studies on the subject have made significant progress in evaluating strategies that
promote park use, they tend to focus on evaluating the strategies based on park-use and health outcomes of the
general population. Little research has focused on evaluating the strategies’ potential and applicability to
increase park use in comminuty of lower-income minority residents who are at a higher risk for poor health
outcomes. Therefore, there is a pressing need to analyze the effectiveness of park-use promoting strategies in
such comminuty.
Building on this research need and in an effort to address the region’s health inequities, researchers at the
University of Minnesota in partnership with the Minneapolis Park and Recreation Board initiated the Survey of
Parks, Leisure-Time Activities and Self-Reported Health (SPLASH) project. The project was aimed at evaluating the
impacts of a 2-tiered intervention process, an environment intervention and an informational intervention on
the park use of residents in three low-income minority neighborhood in Minneapolis, MN. The environment
intervention evaluated consists of physical park improvements at two parks including the opening of a new
community center at one and infrastructural improvements at the other. The informational intervention includes
the provision of better information to residents regarding outdoor recreation opportunities in their
neighborhoods through newsletters and employing incentive program to encourage respondents to visit parks
and trails. To evaluate the interventions, data was collected at baseline (2010) and follow-up (2011) using a
survey. Information collected through the survey included a detailed account of the respondent’s park visits in
the past three days, perceived barriers to park use, and general park use characteristics. The baseline sample
consisted of 568 respondents from the three target neighborhood and the follow-up survey, for which
residences of the baseline survey participants were revisited, consisted of 433 respondents.
Our paper aims to evaluate the effectiveness of these informational and environment strategies to promote
park-use in lower income minority-dominant comminuty. In order to reduce bias from unobservable
confounding factors impacting park use and health, the analysis for this paper will employ a before-after design
with controlled groups for evaluating the interventions.
While this research is on-going and will involve rigorous empirical analysis, we conducted some preliminary tests
for before-after changes in park use and perceptions using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Results from the
environmental intervention analysis showed an increase in the past three-day park visitation in the intervention
neighborhood that received infrastructural improvements (z = 2.96; p = 0.00) and a decrease in the intervention
neighborhood with the new community center (z = -3.19; p = 0.00), compared to no change in the control
neighborhood (z = 0.22; p = 0.82). For the informational intervention, the sample for the study was limited to
respondents who had lived in the neighborhood for more than 1 year to ensure full exposure to the intervention
(N=371). No significant changes were found when comparing before-after park use frequency in both the control
and intervention groups. In contrast, the perception of lack of information about parks decreased in the
intervention group (z = -1.72; p = 0.09) compared to no change in the control group (z = -1.45; p = 0.15).

References
 BEDIMO-RUNG, A. L., MOWEN, A. J. & COHEN, D. A. (2005) The significance of parks to physical activity
and public health: a conceptual model. Am J Prev Med, 28, 159-68.
 KAHN, E. B., RAMSEY, L. T., BROWNSON, R. C., HEATH, G. W., HOWZE, E. H., POWELL, K. E., STONE, E. J.,
RAJAB, M. W. & CORSO, P. (2002) The Effectiveness of Interventions to Increase Physical Activity A
Systematic Review. Am J Prev Med, 22.
 TESTER, J. & BAKER, R. (2009) Making the playfields even: Evaluating the impact of an environment
intervention on park use and physical activity. Preventive Medicine, 316-320.
 ULRICH, R. S., SIMONS, R. F., LOSITO, B. D., FIORITO, E., MILES, M. A. & ZELSON, M. (1991) Stress
Recovery During Exposure to Natural and Urban Environments. J Environ Psychol, 201-230.
 VEITCH, J., BALL, K., CRAWFORD, D., ABBOTT, G. R. & SALMON, J. (2012) Park Improvements and Park
Activity: A natural Experiment Am J Prev Med, 42, 616-619.

Abstract Index #: 181
CONSIDERING THE QUEENSWAY: EVALUATING THE  impact OF COMMUNITY ENGAGED DESIGN
Abstract System ID#: 965
Individual Paper
WILSON, Barbara [University of Virginia] bbwilson@virginia.edu
The emergence of community-engaged design practice is the result of a paradigm shift in design education and
design practice “toward socially responsible, sustainable, humanitarian design” which seeks to work directly with
the community members served by the design intervention (Smith 2007). Community minded designers often
quote Herbert Simon’s definition of design as “changing existing situations into preferred ones.” A new mode of
design practice surfaced in recent decades by challenging what those preferred situations should be and who
should have access to them (Bell and Wakeford 2008, Moore and Wilson 2013). This paper proposes that the
next major question to address in these emerging practices might be who has the agency to affect that change?
Community-engaged design (CED) emerged out of a call for the design professions to directly respond to the
needs of underserved comminuty. But a recent survey illustrates that even self-identified community-engaged
designers rarely do more than what Arnstein’s Ladder of Participation would deem degrees of tokenism to deeply
engage community members in which they work (Arnstein 1969, Blake 2010).
After this survey of practitioners, focus groups, and a scan of organizations across the country, Hester Street
Collaborative’s work on the Queensway emerged as one of the best practice approaches to community engaged
design and planning. The Queensway project was a feasibility study to transform an abandoned railroad in
Queens into a greenway. Hester Street conducted outreach for dlandstudio and wxy architecture as they
developed concepts. Hester Street conducted a series of visioning workshops, and also developed a mobile
outreach toolkit complete with a series of game-like experiences meant to allow people to give feedback in a fun
and casual environment. This mobile toolkit created another venue, rather than the formal public meeting that
can be so stale, for nonprofit partners, school children, and community members to learn and engage with
project concepts.
The central aim of this paper is to help elevate the rigor of engagement and evaluation methods in community
engaged design to ensure more equitable and environmently sound outcomes. The paper will first review the
state of the field based on an online survey and associated focus groups with practitioners, and then deeply dive
into one exemplary case study to understand the manner in which innovative engagement methods are crafted,
employed, and received by underserved comminuty. Care will be taken to understand the level and modes of
integration the data collected through these methods is then incorporated into final designs, as well as to
understand the evaluation metrics used to gauge the equity and sustainability  impact of the project as designed.
Research will be conducted primarily through semi-structured interviews with designers, partners, and clients for
the project. Online surveys will also be deployed to gather information from more public constituents when
appropriate. And finally, content analysis of the meeting notes and plans drafted will be conducted as available.

This paper hopes to contribute to the discourse in planning education and practice on the available methods of
engagement and evaluation in community engaged design.
References
 Arnstein, S. R. (1969). A Ladder Of Citizen Participation. Journal of the American Institute of Planners,
35(4), 216–224. doi:10.1080/01944366908977225
 Bell, B., & Wakeford, K. (2008). Expanding architecture: design as activism. New York: Metropolis Books.
 Blake, S. (2010). In L. Sandercock & G. Attili, Multimedia Explorations in Urban Policy and Planning : an
Exploration of the Next Frontier. Dordrecht: Springer.
 Moore, Steven A. and Barbara B. Wilson, Questioning Architectural Judgment: The
Problem of
Codes in the United States, Routledge: London, 2013.
 Smith, C. E. (2007). Design for the other 90%. New York: Smithsonian, Cooper-Hewitt, National Design
Museum : Distributed to the trade worldwide by Assouline Publishing.

Abstract Index #: 182
HOW ILLEGAL OUTDOOR COMMERCE REVIVES DECLINING STREET SPACE: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY ON MOBILE
FOOD VENDORS' BEHAVIOR ON NIGHT-STREET OPPOSED BY CITY ADMINISTRATION
Abstract System ID#: 1042
Individual Paper
CHENG, Shang [Tongii University] csbwb@163.com, presenting author, primary author
XIA, Nankai [Tongji University, Shanghai Tongji Planning and Design Institute] tjupi@sina.com
Introduction: we make the empirical study by long-standing observation upon mobile food vendors’ behavior on
night-street beside our campus. The street crowded with high-rise buildings falls into the dilemma: most of
restaurants and coffees with street frontage continue to retreat. The reason is that the high house rent causes
the high selling price, which can attract neither white collars nor students in daytime. While white collars leave
and shops close in the evening, the street is lost in the deathly dark and still, with few pedestrians. But some food
vendors emerge at night, aiming at the campus students’ appetite. They locate on street sides or corners, cooking
and selling diverse food by simple pots and gas stoves settled on tricycles. Because of the diversity and nice price,
more and more students gather and hang around the night-street, enjoying delicious food. Some attracted
pedestrians also change their formal routines to join this grand fest. Therefore the street is filled with various
people, food, light, odor and noises, and so becomes vivacious consequently. No doubt the outdoor commerce
has some shortcomings on food sanitation and devotes no tax or rent, so is forbidden by commerce and hygiene
administration and inspected by police patrol, but the vendors have their own sentries who observe the
emergence of policemen, before which they are able to retreat quickly. When they disappear, the street returns
again to the dark and still dramatically. After a long-term “cat and mouse game”, both vendors and policemen
fulfill an informal coordination, as the power of police patrol is not overwhelming and the vendors indeed help
guard the street safety to an evidential extent.
Framework: the contradiction between shop decline in daytime and vendor rise at night indicates the thinking of
William Whyte: what is the essence of space and who is the lord of space? According to his theory and attitude,
space serves people as it provides place for human behavior, which endow space the vitality and durability in
return. Both the void space without people coming and the temporal space without people staying are useless.
Then we raise the hypothesis: the essence of space lies in the crowd of people who gather, wander and hold
durable activities. They also attract other merchants, who make use of such high human density to raise the
chance of deals. Shops are initiated afterwards because of the durability, and the house rent rises accordingly.
The government can also levy a tax on shop owners and landlords, even losing a little from vendors. In this sense,
the real lord of space is the street vendor who leads original attractions and ignites the passion of crowd, not the
landlord. Vendors create and maintain apparently space value, which is embodied by house rent. If they leave
and no other attractions substitute, the space declines. We also underline that such originality is not planned
directly by the government or developers, while it achieves the objective of planning indirectly.

Methods: we process this empirical study by behavior tracing, activity observation, individual interview and
quantitative statistics. A genius vendor who sells crepe and attracts the most guests is paid more attention. He
stayed at street corner with highest human density, where is also the ambiguous border of different
administration districts, so he could alter his location easily according to the policemen’s sources. After gaining
immovable celebrity, he rents a small house and runs a crepe shop. Other vendors and shops also settle around
his shop to free ride his trademark. The story from vendor to shop owner indicates precisely how his illegal
business vibrates the process of space revival.
References
 Whyte, W H. (1988). City: Rediscovering the center, New York: Doubleday.
 Jacobs, J. (1993). The death and life of great American city，New York: Modern Library.
 Staudt, K. (1996). Struggles in urban space - street vendors in El Paso and Ciudad Juarez. Urban Affairs
Review, 31(4), 435-454.
 Donovan, M G. (2008). Informal city and the contestation of public space: The case of bogotá's street
vendors, 1988 - 2003. Urban Studies, 45(1), 29.
 Hunt, S. (2009). Citizenship's place: The state's creation of public space and street vendors' culture of
informality in Bogota, Colombia. Environment and Planning d-Society & Space, 27(2), 331-351.

Abstract Index #: 183
TOWARD A THEORY OF INTERCULTURAL PLACES AND PLACEMAKING: BRAZILIAN ETHNIC RESTAURANTS IN Tōkyō
JAPAN
Abstract System ID#: 1101
Individual Paper
ZAMBONELLI, Vera [University of Hawaii] veraz@hawaii.edu
Intercultural places and placemaking develops a theory of intercultural placemaking through the study of
Brazilian restaurants in Tōkyō, Japan. How and under what conditions can urban places, like ethnic restaurants,
serve as vehicles for intercultural interaction, learning and engagement? And more specifically, in what ways do
Brazilian restaurants serve as places of intercultural exchange and understanding between Japanese and
Brazilians in Tōkyō? are the main research questions that drove this exploratory research to examine the role of
actually existing places in today’s living with cultural diversity in Tōkyō, Japan, a country unused to think of itself
as multicultural.
I used Brazilian ethnic restaurants to think about the place –literal and metaphorical- of the Brazilian presence in
contemporary Tōkyō. The attention paid to the Brazilian presence is justified by it being the third largest group of
foreigners living in Japan since the early 1990s, a consequence of a special visa that created the Nikkei category
for Brazilians of Japanese ancestry to work and reside in Japan. It is a case that exemplifies Japan’s need of
foreign workers and yet its inability to fully embrace them as members of society. Thus, studying and
documenting the dissemination of knowledge about Brazil and its culture in these sites is compelling given the
limited latitude of expression that Brazilians (Nikkei or not) have in the Japanese political and ideologicalnormative realms.
By employing the notion of micropublics (Amin, 2002), a prime site for reconciling and overcoming the tensions
that may be associated with difference through everyday urban, daily and local negotiations, I focused on the
everyday urban, daily routines and local negotiations that bring Japanese and Brazilians to Brazilian restaurants. I
designed this research taking a grounded theory approach using comparative case study as a qualitative method,
and looked at the processes of placemaking – the processes that lead to the making of tangible places as well as
social spaces- to examine the terms of engagements between Japanese and Brazilian within those places.
The research findings reveal how individual characteristics, motivation, and path leading to the making of a
Brazilian ethnic restaurant and its actual setting affect the ways the place can be experienced, while concurrently
interacting with the type of intercultural experience it fosters. By examining the setting of a restaurant, this study

identifies the programmatic, aesthetic, and interactive qualities that lend to greater or lesser intercultural
exchange. This study reveals the different types and levels of intercultural relations, from simple co-existence to
deeper engagement and exchange.
References
 Amin, A. (2002). "Ethnicity and the Multicultural City: Living with Diversity." Environment and Planning A
34: 959-980.
 Schiller, N. G., T. Darieva, et al. (2011). "Defining cosmopolitan sociability in a transnational age. An
introduction." Ethnic and Racial Studies 34(3): 399-418.
 Pettie, L. (1998). Convivial city. city for citizens : planning and the rise of civil society in a global age
M. Douglass and J. Friedmann. Chichester, England ; New York, J. Wiley: 247-253
 Fincher, R. and K. Iveson (2008). Planning and diversity in the city: redistribution, recognition and
encounter Palgrave Macmillan.
 Sandercock, L. (2003). Cosmopolis II: Mongrel city in the 21st Century, London and New York:
Continuum.

Abstract Index #: 184
WHO BELONGS IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD? NEGOTIATING SOCIAL INCLUSION AND A SENSE OF BELONGING IN
PLANNING FOR URBAN SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY
Abstract System ID#: 1140
Individual Paper
KOHON, Jacklyn [Portland State University] jacklynk@gmail.com
Planning for sustainable comminuty involves various decisions that affect environment, economic and social
systems. Scholars continue to debate theoretical definitions and actions relevant to the social dimension of
sustainability (Vallance, Perkins, and Dixon, 2011). Meanwhile, many neighborhood-scale sustainability planning
projects are attempting to negotiate the inherently subjective nature of theoretical concepts that define socially
sustainable comminuty, such as social inclusion and nurturing a sense of belonging (Colantonio & Dixon, 2009).
While these may represent the theoretical ideal, the reality of working toward these goals in urban comminuty
is complex and fraught with contradictions, particularly with regard to inclusion of sexually oriented businesses
and representation of immigrants and other marginalized groups. This study explores three case studies of
neighborhood-scale sustainability planning projects in Portland, Oregon, U.S.; Copenhagen, Denmark; and
Nagoya, Japan to describe how these comminuty are grappling with the challenges of planning for social
sustainability. This analysis seeks primarily to answer the question: Whose interests are being emphasized and
whose interests are being overlooked throughout the planning process? Each community is confronting
challenges that further blur the lines of what it means to cultivate social sustainability. Emergent themes include
negotiating contested  land_uses, integration of the disenfranchised, and marginalization of the marginalized.
Notions of social sustainability are complicated by active inclusion or exclusion of the truly marginalized.
Resistance, regulation, and exclusion of sexually oriented businesses are components of the social production of
space (Papayanis, 2000) that reinforce a heteronormative moral geography (Hubbard, et al., 2013). However,
communities are forced to weigh social inclusivity over concerns of nuisance and negative externalities of
sexually oriented businesses. comminuty also find challenges associated with the nuanced needs of immigrants
that go beyond translation, interpretation, and culturally relevant outreach. Questions arise over who should be
included, who should feel that they belong and to what lengths community leaders should go to achieve these
ideals. In essence, social sustainability for whom? At what expense? While the field of planning has long debated
locally unwanted  land_uses (LULUs) (Popper, 1981), representation among immigrant groups, the right to the city,
and NIMBYism, these notions are considered in this new context of unraveling what it means to plan for urban
social sustainability.
References
 Colantonio, A., & Dixon, T. (2009). Measuring Socially Sustainable Urban Regeneration in Europe. Oxford
Institute for Sustainable Development, pp. 1-129.






Hubbard, P., Boydell, S., Crofts, P., Prior, J., and Searle, G. (2013). Noxious neighbors? Interrogating the
impacts of sex premises in residential area. Environment and Planning A, 45, 1-16.
Papayanis, M. (2000). Sex and the revanchist city: zoning out pornography in New York. Environment
and Planning D: Society and Space, 18, 341-54.
Popper, F. J. (1981). Siting LULU's. Planning, 47(4), 12-15.
Vallance, S., Perkins, H. C., & Dixon, J. E. (2011). What is social sustainability? A clarification of concepts.
Geoforum, 42(3), 342-348.

Abstract Index #: 185
SENSE OF PLACE IN DOUGLAS PARK: EXPLORING RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN PUBLIC LIFE, PLACE RELATIONS,
AND THE POLITICS OF PLACE IN AN URBAN PARK
Abstract System ID#: 1213
Poster
KUTTY, Asha [University of Missouri, Columbia] kuttya@missouri.edu
This project explores a sense of place in Douglas Park, Columbia, MO as it relates to the African American
community that uses it. Douglas Park is a neighborhood park in Columbia MO. It is situated in Columbia’s highest
density of low-income and minority residents (U.S. Census Bureau, 2010). The neighborhood is tightly knit but
impoverished, a legacy of Columbia’s segregation and urban renewal program that leveled a once-flourishing,
though poor, African American community and replaced it with a state highway, commercial development, and
housing projects.
The term ‘sense of place’ for this study considers theories and methods taken from the Environment and
Behavior and Urban Design fields namely: Public life, Place relations, and the Politics of place. Theories on the
sense of place have made critical contributions to our understanding of our relationships to place. For the most
part, these theories have followed two separate domains. The first, largely followed by the urban design field,
analyzes the social dimensions of public life in urban public spaces such as parks, plazas and pedestrian friendly
streets. Examples include observing and analyzing the ways in which people stand, sit, walk, people watch,
socialize and engage in recreational activities amidst the physical design of these urban public spaces.
The second domain on the sense of place, largely followed by the environment and behavior and cultural
geography fields, articulates the roles and meanings places have in our lives. Here, research has tended to focus
on the perceptual dimensions of our relationships to various places, in particular our affective personal ties to
various places and the meanings we derive from them. Empirical research has mostly taken place in residential
settings, with a few focusing on the public domain.
Very few studies have attempted an interdisciplinary approach that bridges together both the social and
perceptual dimensions of a sense of place. Those that have, tend to concentrate on one domain, while arbitrarily
looking at the other. These biases to either one domain leave out significant questions concerning the interplay
of affective ties and meanings towards certain public spaces and the various social behaviors within those spaces.
This is especially important for those public spaces that are considered ideologically important towards certain
communities.
In addition, in both the social and perceptual domains, very few studies have looked into spaces that are
important to African American neighborhood and comminuty. The few that have, are in the perceptual
category and have focused either on residential settings or on religious spaces, but have avoided public spaces.
This lack of attention towards important public spaces to African American neighborhood is unfortunate. The
years after the abolishment of Jim Crow laws, were ones that finally allowed African Americans to exist in the
public domain without random harassment and unchallenged violence. These gained freedoms within public
spaces may have steered African Americans to perceive certain public spaces within their neighborhood as
emotionally laden spaces with symbolic value. These values could be embedded in the daily uses, scenes and
actions within these spaces.

Due to these shortcomings, the proposed project becomes important. Douglas Park has long been considered as
a central public space, both socially and ideologically to several African American residents in Columbia. A holistic
study that evaluates and interprets the social behaviors within the park, and the affective ties and meanings it
holds to its users, can contribute theoretically, methodologically and substantively to the sense of place research
field. It can help weave together complex and intangible phenomena often associated with the perceptual
dimension, with the more measurable social dimensions associated with the field. In doing so, it hopes to bring
Douglas Park to life as a spatial expression of public life, culture and politics.

Abstract Index #: 186
PLANNING AS TRANSLATION: COMMUNITY PLANNING FOR UNDOCUMENTED LATINO IMMIGRANTS IN SAN
JOSE, CALIFORNIA
Abstract System ID#: 1255
Individual Paper
BURGA, Hector Fernando [University of California, Berkeley] hfburga@berkeley.edu
This analysis examines techniques for community planning in the context of unauthorized immigration to
consider how planners can forge substantive collaborations with undocumented immigrants. By providing a case
study that chronicles planning studios in San Jose, California, I evaluate deliberative planning practices in
undergraduate and masters level instructional settings to consider principles and techniques that embrace
planning as a process of civic engagement and capacity building led by undocumented Latino immigrants.
I argue that this process upholds urban_planning as an act of translation; a process in which the meaning of
planning principles is not only communicated between planners and non-planners, but also an approach in which
social learning equips planning techniques with advocacy and leadership qualities. Planning as translation re-visits
central questions concerning power and the ethics of deliberative planning by introducing legal citizenship as an
unresolved tension that calls for the adoption of planning techniques by undocumented immigrants to generate
collective agency and political empowerment.
In the first part of this case I summarize the literature on deliberative planning to address key gaps concerning
the inclusion undocumented immigrants in planning processes. Planning is exemplified by a normative
conception of the public interest that portrays the resident as a figure with full citizenship rights: someone who
can fully participate, vote, understand compete and disagree with planning goals and objectives. Nevertheless,
non-citizens can’t adopt this identity, besides cultural barriers and language limitations that may arise, essentially
they don’t hold the substantive rights that allow them to stake legal claims for and against planning objectives.
Similarly, the un-authorized condition of undocumented immigrants forces them to constantly negotiate their
visibility in public life, disrupting short term and long term participation in deliberative planning processes. I
consider these exceptions in relation to the model of collaborative rationality (Innes & Booher 2010) and its
application within a neighborhood context defined by the demographic majority of undocumented immigrants.
I continue this analysis by providing the background of the studios that I taught at San Jose to consider the
successes and limitations of planning for translation. I examine a number of key principles that were used to
define community engagement with undocumented immigrants through planning themes and suggest a number
of techniques – policy analysis and education, cognitive mapping as social learning, generative reviews, popular
education techniques, and inquiry by design approaches – that point towards civic engagement and capacity
building when applied in an undocumented immigrant setting. I explore the outcomes of these techniques as well
as their limitations within the institutional arrangements that defined studio pedagogy and the political context
of the neighborhood.
References
 Planning with complexity (Innes & Booher 2010)
 The deliberative practitioner (Forester 1999)
 Pedagogy of the oppressed (Freire 1970)




Advocacy and pluralism in Planning (Davidoff 1965)
Cities and ciitzenzhip (Holston & Appudarai 1996)

Abstract Index #: 187
A CLOSER LOOK AT DIVERSITY: NON-BLACK STUDENTS ENROLLED IN PLANNING program AT HISTORICALLY
BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES
Abstract System ID#: 1320
Individual Paper
WESLEY, Joan [Jackson State University] joan.m.wesley@jsums.edu, presenting author, primary author
MEREM, Edmund [Jackson State University] edmund.c.merem@jsums.edu
ODOM, LaRhonda [Savannah State University] odoml@savannahstate.edu
The number of non-Black and Hispanic students of any race enrolled in planning program at Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) may be characterized as dismal (Association of Collegiate Schools of Planning
[ACSP], 2014). This is a topic worthy of the discussion, diversity in planning education. Some scholars (Thomas,
2012) have long emphasized the need for planning schools to explore ways to respond effectively to issues
surrounding equity, inclusiveness and diversity. However, planning literature indicates a dearth of information
regarding non-Black and Hispanic student enrollment in HBCU planning program. Multicultural competence is
important for planners as the nation becomes more culturally diverse (Sandercock, 2003). HBCUs offer non-Black
and Hispanic planning students unique opportunities to expand ideas about diversity and increase cultural
awareness.
Our research captures the experiences of non-Black and Hispanic students enrolled in graduate planning
programs at five HBCUs. We define non-Black as students who self identify racially as other than Black and those
who self identify ethnically as Hispanic of any race. We do not include in our study participants in overlapping
racial and ethnic categories. The research poses four principle questions: (1) Why do non-Black and Hispanic
students of any race choose to pursue graduate degrees in planning at an HBCU? (2) What HBCU experiences do
these students consider most beneficial in preparing them for employment after graduation? (3) What unique
challenges do they encounter? (4) How likely are these students to encourage other non-Black and Hispanic
students to attend an HBCU planning program? Additional questions are subsumed under the four primary
questions.
We use a mixed method approach that combines qualitative and quantitative data collected from primary and
secondary sources. Through a series of personal interviews and a questionnaire, participants share their
experiences as students enrolled in HBCU planning program. The questionnaire consists of open-ended
questions to allow for quantification of responses followed by open-ended questions to obtain more detailed,
qualitative data. Secondary sources draw from existing literature relative to White, other non-Black and Hispanic
students attending HBCUs.
The research illuminates the experiences of non-Black and Hispanic students enrolled in planning program at
HBCUs. Simultaneously, the work foregrounds an understudied topic and adds a new dimension to the diversity
conversation taking place in planning education. Finally the research speaks to the critical role played by HBCUs
in educating the next generation of planners.
References
 Association Collegiate Schools of Planning Guide to Undergraduate and Graduate Education Planning,
20th Edition – 2014.
 Sandercock, L. (2003, September). Planning in the ethno-culturally diverse city: A comment. Planning
Theory & Practice, 4(3), 319–323.
 Thomas, J. M. (2011). Educating planners: Unified diversity for social action in Campbell & Fainstein
(Ed.), Readings in Planning Theory (2nd ed.), (pp. 356-375). Blackwell: USA.



What is an HBCU? (n. d.). Retrieved from http://www.ed.gov/edblogs/whhbcu/one-hundred-and-fivehistorically-black-colleges-and-universities/

Abstract Index #: 188
PLANNING FOR DIVERSITY? A CASE STUDY OF MAINLAND CHINESE IN VANCOUVER, CANADA
Abstract System ID#: 1343
Individual Paper
FENG, Lisi [University of British Columbia] feng_lisi@hotmail.com
Since the 1960s, scholars from different intellectual backgrounds have made eloquent pleas for an urban strategy
that promotes physical and social diversity (Jacobs 1961; Florida 2002; Young 1990; Sandercock 1997, 2003).
Underlying the appeal of city life, diversity has become the new orthodoxy of city planning (Fainstein 2005).
While it has the potential to evoke greater understanding and stimulate creativity, exposure to “the other” can
intensify anxieties if different socioeconomic groups perceive the lifestyles of each other as irreconcilable (Harvey
1992; Sennett 1971). The dilemma of diversity in public policy is particularly salient in North American city
where immigration contributes to various kinds of socioeconomic diversity.
In light of the theoretical debate on the value of diversity, I use various groups of Mainland Chinese in Vancouver,
Canada as a case study to discuss the limits of diversity as a normative ideal in city planning. In the City of
Vancouver, Chinese is the largest ethnic group among all ethnicities including those of English and Scottish origins
(Vancouver Foundation 2010). The perceived wealth of some individuals has made this ethnic group the easy
suspects embroiled in a protracted housing debate in Vancouver, one that pitted Chinese immigrants as foreign
investors against local white Vancouverites. Consequently, anxieties and fear in the realm of housing and real
estate development challenge the official claims for cultural diversity and tolerance of difference. Without
lumping together groups from various localities in Mainland China, I examine specific urban processes in three
Chinese city – Beijing, Shanghai and Zhongshan – that generate differences among Mainland Chinese groups
prior to their arrivals in Vancouver. I argue that the promotion of diversity needs to be contextualized within
meaningful discussion on the economic structure and global division of labour that shape and reshape group
differences.
This paper represents some of the findings from my doctoral dissertation based on 73 in-depth interviews, nonparticipant observations, field-trips to Beijing, Shanghai and Zhongshan, as well as analyses of primary and
secondary sources of materials in both Chinese and English.
My findings contribute to a growing body of research that explores relationships among immigration, diversity
and city planning. Rather than simply acknowledging the multiple kinds of diversification affecting ethnicities and
identities, languages, social classes, skills and more that arise from immigration, I found it important to integrate
knowledge of processes and mechanisms beyond the geographical space of migrant-receiving city. As city are
increasingly linked with each other through global migration, my research offers significant insight into urban
strategies to cope with the increased settlement of different social groups.
References
 Fainstein, S.S. (2005). “Cities and Diversity: Should We Want It? Can We Plan For it?” Urban Affairs
Review, Vol. 41, No.1: 3-19.
 Harvey, D. (1992). “Social Justice, Postmodernism, and the City.” Internal Journal of Urban and Regional
Research 16: 588-601.
 Jacobs, J. (1961). The Death and Life of Great American city. New York: Vintage.
 Sandercock, L. (1997). Towards Cosmopolis: Planning for Multicultural city. New York: John Wiley.
 Young, I.M. (1990). Justice and the Politics of Difference. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Abstract Index #: 189
WELCOMING city AND COUNTIES: IMMIGRATION policy AT THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT LEVEL
Abstract System ID#: 1345
Individual Paper
LIU, Cathy [Georgia State University] cyliu@gsu.edu
In a context of variegated immigration  impact and economic and political landscapes, studies that examine the
immigration policy at the local level as well as the factors and rationales underlying local governments’ policy
adoption are much needed. We approach this issue from the lens of a local government policy on planning for
immigrant integration: Welcoming America and its participating welcoming comminuty. Welcoming America is
a grass-root organization that aims at promoting a welcoming, immigrant-friendly environment to immigrants
through convening a community of U.S. city to share their resolutions, strategies and policy in supporting
long-term immigrant integration and fostering more vibrant and inclusive local comminuty. It departs from
previous federal, state, and local government immigration policy through its component on economic
development and job creation role of skilled immigrant workers and entrepreneurs. Thirty one city and counties
have participated in this initiative and term themselves as “welcoming city” or “welcoming county”. The
participating city and counties vary substantially in their historical role in immigrant reception, geographic
location, immigrant share, economic size, demographic compositions, and political environment. The wide
variation enables us to examine the differential weight of these factors in the immigration planning and policy
making at the local level.
We will provide a comprehensive survey of the characteristics of these participating welcoming city and
counties, especially focusing on their immigration populations, economic status, and political settings. We will
also generate a typology of specific immigrant-related initiative and policy adopted by these welcoming city
and counties, especially those focused on economic development. We will then conduct an empirical analysis on
the factors influence the political diffusion and learning process of these local comminuty and their potential
impact over time. This research will generate timely policy insight on planning for diverse population and
economic growth at the local level.

Track 5: Housing and Community Development
Abstract Index #: 190
AFFORDABLE HOUSING ADVOCACY ORGANIZATIONS AND THEIR STRATEGIC CHOICES TO INFLUENCE POLICY
CHANGE
Abstract System ID#: 10
Individual Paper
YERENA, Anaid [University of California, Irvine] anaid.y@uci.edu
Although group power and influence is one of the most investigated aspects of interest group activity (Thomas,
2004), the work is highly lacking when it comes to defining an explanation of what leads to influence
(Baumgartner & Leech, 1998). The lack of conclusive results that could generate a general theory of group
influence on the political system is partly attributed to the dynamic process of policy-making. The policy-making
process involves many variables, thus makes it difficult to identify all of them in each situation (Thomas, 2004;
Baumgartner & Leech, 1998; Peterson, 1992).
The questions this work seeks to answer are the following: What are the strategies/tactics used by AOs to
influence city affordable housing policymaking? Why do advocacy organizations (AOs) favor some actions over
others when influencing affordable housing decision-makers? and How and when are AOs’ strategies effective in
procuring support for affordable housing? To answer these questions I conducted case studies in four city in Los

Angeles County. I collected data through in-depth interviews with key stakeholders in the low- income housing
policy process (AO leaders and city officials), a review of financial records for the AOs from the Urban Institute’s
National Center for Charitable Statistics, and a content analysis of each city’s Housing Element. I triangulated
interview responses from AO leaders and city officials with data gathered through document review of AO
materials and the content analysis of each city's housing plan. The combination of data sources and methods
enhanced the validity and reliability of the results generated by this portion of the research. The city is the unit of
analysis for the case studies, while the AOs in each city provided illustrative scenarios as embedded units. These
embedded units helped focus the inquiry of the case studies (Yin, 2009; Carroll and Johnson, 1990).
This research draws from urban politics and social movement theories to frame the investigation and analysis.
The political opportunities and resources the organization determine the strategies an AO will employ to
influence policy. Political opportunity theory asserts that in selecting a strategy, an AO considers the degree of
political freedom it has to express the group's dissatisfaction with the status quo. This freedom ranges from free
press and free speech (Gamson, 2009) to the degree of openness or accessibility of the political system to
collectivities’ demands (Snow and Soule, 2010). This theory considers the interplay between the political system,
sociopolitical conditions, and the way AOs interpret the situation in selecting their strategic actions. Resource
mobilization theory, on the other hand, claims the emergence and persistence of mobilization and choice of
strategic actions, depends on the resources available to the AO. This theory attempts to move the analysis away
from the social psychology of its participants and provides a more objective way of understanding AOs ‘choice of
tactics (McCarthy and Zald, 2002).
The contribution to planning literature is the synthesis of urban politics and social movement theories to offer a
more robust understanding of urban governance around the development of local community housing plans and
the implementation of affordable housing policy. Theoretically, this work will provide a more nuanced
understanding of city housing planning and policy-making, including the role of AOs in civic participation. This
work supports Planning and community development practice by identifying and assessing AOs’ strategies and
their effectiveness in achieving preferred policy outcomes.
References
 Baumgartner, F. R. & Leech, B. L. (1998) Basic Interests. Princeton University Press.
 Gamson, W. A., (2009). Bystanders, public opinion, and the media. In D. A. Snow, S. A. Soule, & H. Kriesi
(Eds.), Blackwell companion to social movements (pp. 242 – 261). Malden, MA: Blackwell.
 McCarthy, J. D., and M. N. Zald (2002) The enduring vitality of the resource mobilization theory of social
movements. In J. H. Turner (Ed.), Handbook of Sociological Theory. P. 533–565. New York: Kluwer
Academic/Plenum.
 Peterson, J. (1992). The European technology community. Policy networks in a supranational setting.
Policy Networks in British Governments. Oxford: Clarendon, 226-248.
 Thomas, C. S. (Ed.). (2004). Research Guide to United States and International Interest Groups.
Greenwood Publishing Group.

Abstract Index #: 191
THE  impact OF LOCATION AFFORDABILITY ON NEIGHBORHOOD HOUSING MARKET RESILIENCE DURING AND
AFTER THE U.S. HOUSING CRISIS
Abstract System ID#: 11
Individual Paper
WANG, Kyungsoon [Georgia Institute of Technology] kwang42@gatech.edu, presenting author, primary author
IMMERGLUCK, Dan [Georgia Tech] dan.immergluck@coa.gatech.edu
The concept of resilience has been attractive to both planning academics and practitioners because of its ability
to produce positive outcomes after overcoming negative shocks and challenges. Resilience was first introduced
by Holling (1973) as an ecological term and was later re-defined as the ability of a system to absorb external
shocks and still maintain its basic function and structure (Walker and Salt, 2006). Since the beginning of the Great

Recession, housing market resilience has been a critical interest to planners, economists, and geographers in the
U.S. One of questions raised has been why some neighborhood have been more affected by the financial crisis,
while others have not.
Resilience can involve much broader and multi-facetted issues, and studies on housing market resilience are
scarce. Most planning scholars interested in resilience have focused on labor market resilience to economic
shocks (Chapple and Lester, 2010) and housing market resilience to natural hazard disasters (Zhang & Peacock,
2010). However, few studies have examined housing market resilience to economic shocks. For example,
Immergluck (2014) recently showed that racial diversity by recent immigrants contribute to neighborhood
housing market recovery and resilience.
Given this research gap, the purpose of the study is to examine neighborhood resilience in the context of
different metropolitan housing markets in the U.S. from 2000 to 2014, particularly focusing on the effects of
location affordability taking both housing and transportation costs into account. Location affordability may
contribute to neighborhood housing resilience.
This study uses multivariate analysis to examine the  impact of location affordability on neighborhood housing
resilience during and after the U.S. housing crisis. The housing resilience indicator used as the dependent
variables to measure the performance of housing markets is home value. The key independent variable is the
location affordability, while controlling variables include housing and mortgage market characteristics, socioeconomic and demographic characteristics, industrial structure, infrastructure, and others.
Considering the contribution of the housing sector to the national economy, the study on housing market
resilience to economic recession is important for policy makers and planners to establish planning goals and
strategies for a sustainable healthy housing market. Furthermore, understanding neighborhood resilience in the
context of metropolitan housing markets will provide federal, state, and local governments with policy
implications for helping neighborhood not only to be more resilient, but also to prevent a downturn of
communities during the next possible economic recession.
References
 Chapple, K., & Lester, T. (2010). The resilient regional labor market? The U.S. case. Cambridge Journal of
Regions, Economy and Society 3, 85-104.
 Holling, C. S. (1973). Resilience and stability of ecological system. Annual Review of Ecology and
Systematics, 4(1), 1-23.
 Immergluck, D. (2014). Divergent resilience: Explaining changes in neighborhood housing vacancy in the
post-crisis U.S. national housing recovery. Working paper. School of City and Regional Planning at
Georgia Institute of Technology.
 Walker, B., & Salt, D. (2006). Resilience thinking: sustaining ecosystems and people in a changing world.
Washington: Island Press.
 Zhang, Y., & Peacock, W.G. (2010). Planning for housing recovery? Lessons learned from Hurricane
Andrew. Journal of the American Planning Association, 76(1), 5-24.

Abstract Index #: 192
DUBAI'S LOW-INCOME RESIDENTS BEING PUSHED TO THE BRINK: OLD neighborhood, MEMORIES, AND
HUMAN EMOTIONS BROUGHT TO RUBBLE
Abstract System ID#: 15
Individual Paper
ALAWADI, Khaled [Masdar Institute of Science and Technology] khaled.alawadi@yahoo.com
Dubai appears frequently in city and urban studies literature, which typically focus on either its glamorous and
monumental approach to planning or its poorly regulated growth. The year 2008 represented a shift in Dubai’s
development history. The city systematically transformed its development practices from the optimization of

vacant land to the removal of traditional and publicly occupied land. This study tells the story of the
transformation, partial demise, and unclear fate of a Dubai neighborhood. Al-Satwa, a traditionally designed
neighborhood, demonstrates a kind of urban violence that is under-theorized in urban studies literature: the
disruption caused by top-down redevelopment. This article describes two kinds of violence that have
characterized redevelopment efforts in Al-Satwa: displacement of residents and destruction of cultural fabrics.
The article draws on several kinds of government and historical documents, field observation, and interviews
with Al-Satwa residents. Findings reveal that Dubai’s post-2008 planning acts purposefully destroyed many
traditional neighborhood in order to expand Dubai’s culture of excess and superlative architecture. I show how
these actions affect the living conditions of Al-Satwa’s low-income workers, who are strongly attached to their
modest environment.
Al-Satwa, one of Dubai’s oldest urban neighborhood, is located in a prime location, contiguous to the new
downtown area. From the late 1960s to the early 1990s, it housed the indigenous population. In the mid-1990s,
the migration of local families to suburban area enabled the working class to take control of the area, and the
most recent figures indicate that this district houses around 39,488 low-income workers. In 2007, the entire area
was allocated to a semi-government firm for the purpose of transforming it into a luxury district. The firm
compensated local owners and started the process of demolition. In 2008, after razing a huge tract of Al-Satwa,
the firm halted the project due to the recession.
This study tells the story of an interrupted demolition-and-redevelopment project that has prioritized serving the
economic elite to the exclusion of other values, such as historical preservation and serving a diverse population.
The article offers an evidence-based theoretical contribution to the concept of urban violence. Specifically, the
case of Al-Satwa demonstrates that urban violence is not just overt physical conflict between members of the
population. Instead, urban violence can also include top-down projects that upset the lives of residents. In this
paper, I ask: How can the case of Al-Satwa contribute to scholarly conceptualizations of urban violence?
This research reflects how Dubai’s core area are controlled by public-private business leaders and demonstrates
how top down planning thoughts and actions, when they merely favor high-end people and fast investment
return, can be a form of urban violence with a traumatic effect on low-income individuals. Participants in this
study expressed a strong sense of belonging to the neighborhood, satisfaction with the neighborhood and their
homes, and appreciation of the local environment. Scholars argue that these factors are core indicators of social
stability. Going much further back, the Greek philosopher Plato said that the ideal city must mitigate against
exploitation and must provide shelter, protection, and most importantly happiness to its residents. For this
reason, I argue that Dubai is enacting a type of urban violence by knocking down Al-Satwa to expand the city’s
commercial realty and high-end lifestyle facilities. The dimensions of this violence include eliminating physical
areas that carry strong emotional memories, demolishing the old city fabric to benefit business interests,
displacing residents and employees, depriving Dubai of a unique and vigorous place, disregarding traditional
lifestyles and urban fabrics, and disrupting residents’ sense of satisfaction and security by creating confusion
about the neighborhood’s future.
References
 Garde, A.M. (2008) Innovations in urban design and urban form. Journal of Planning Education and
Research, 28, pp. 61–72.
 Hu, R. (2013) Urban design plans for downtown San Francisco: a paradigm shift? Journal of Urban
Design, 18, pp. 517–533.
 Davidson, C. (2008) Dubai: The Vulnerability of Success. New York: Colombia University Press.
 Elsheshtawy, Y. (2008) Transitory sites: mapping Dubai’s forgotten urban spaces. International Journal of
Urban and Regional Research, 32, pp., 968–988.
 Frieden, B.J. and Sagalyn, L.B. (1989) Downtown, Inc.: How America Rebuilds city. Cambridge,, MA:
MIT Press.

Abstract Index #: 193
PEOPLE OR PLACE IN NONPROFIT ANTI-POVERTY program? COMPARATIVE CASE ANALYSIS IN RIO GRANDE
VALLEY COLONIAS
Abstract System ID#: 32
Individual Paper
RIVERA, Danielle [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] dzrivera@umich.edu
This paper brings community development, third sector, and poverty literatures together to ask how variations in
nonprofit organization and funding system affect anti-poverty measures. While planning scholars have observed
the functions, shortcomings, and political orientations of Community Development Corporations (CDCs) and
other forms of nonprofit and grassroots organization (Stoecker, 1997; Vidal, 1996), the role of anti-poverty
funding schemes on these organizations merits more grounded evaluation. As nonprofit funders attempt to
stretch each donated dollar, the historic debates between person-centered and placed-based approaches to
poverty reduction are resurfacing in nonprofit service delivery. This research examines these issues within Rio
Grande Valley (“Valley”) colonias in Texas. The Valley is one of the most impoverished regions in the United
States, with a poverty rate of nearly 38-percent. Its two major city (McAllen and Brownsville) are consistently
ranked as the poorest city in the United States. Across this region, the poorest neighborhood –the “colonias” –
still live without adequate housing or access to basic services, like water, electricity, and waste management,
among others (Ward, 1999). In lieu of public planners, the colonias of the Valley have cultivated a strong system
of grassroots and nonprofit organizations (Donelson, 2004) that dates back to Cesar Chavez’s farmworker
movement of the late 1970s.
Based on a qualitative case study of Valley nonprofits, I comparatively analyze the complex networks connecting
funders to colonias organizations to residents. I select organizations and funders based on locational and
programmatic criteria for inclusion in a series of semi-structured interviews and an organizational survey.
Additionally, focus groups with colonias residents test the  impact of nonprofit program by crosschecking the
veracity of organizational responses. From this, I evaluate each program in terms of the theories of poverty
influencing its funding structures. Most notably, there exist hybrid person/place funding schemes, program, and
cross-organizational collaborations that leverage the strengths and weaknesses of each approach (Spencer,
2004). Ultimately, this paper contributes to research on housing and community development organizations,
specifically regarding U.S. colonias, and the potential influences of various anti-poverty funding schemes on
nonprofit planning attempts in our poorest comminuty.
References
 Donelson, A. (2004). The Role of NGOs and NGO Networks in Meeting the Needs of US Colonias.
Community Development Journal, 39(4), 332-344.
 Ward, P. M. (1999). Colonias and Public Policy in Texas and Mexico: Urbanization by Stealth. Austin, TX:
University of Texas Press.
 Spencer, J. H. (2004). People, Places, and Policy: A Politically Relevant Framework for Efforts to Reduce
Concentrated Poverty. The Policy Studies Journal, 32(4), 545-568.
 Stoecker, R. (1997). The CDC Model of Urban Redevelopment: A Critique and an Alternative. Journal of
Urban Affairs, 19(1), 1-22.
 Vidal, A. (1996). CDCs as Agents of Neighborhood Change: The State of the Art. In D. Keating, N.
Krumholz, & P. Star (Eds.), Revitalizing Urban neighborhood. Lawrence, KA: University Press of Kansas.

Abstract Index #: 194
THE EFFECT OF IMPROVED HOUSING ON THE HEALTH OF LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLDS
Abstract System ID#: 41
Individual Paper
BURAYIDI, Michael [Ball State University] Maburayidi@bsu.edu

The relationship between poor housing and public health has been well documented since at least the industrial
revolution. Housing  impact health in two ways. The first is the physical unit itself that is designed to “address
basic human needs for shelter and security by providing protection against climatic conditions (excessive heat
and cold) and unwanted intrusions from insects, rodents and environment nuisances, such as noise that may be
harmful for health and well-being” and the other is the “capacity to nurture and sustain social and psychological
processes” (Lawrence 2010, 145). Gibson e. al (2011) similarly identified three pathways linking housing and
health: i) area characteristics (for example, crime rates and access to amenities), ii) internal housing conditions
(particularly cold and damp conditions, and lead poisoning), and iii) housing tenure (owner versus renter status).
In other studies, Julien e. al. (2008) found higher incidence of migraine and headaches among families living in
poor quality housing, and Ambrose (2001) found a 7-fold decrease in the health costs to low income families in
the United Kingdom after their housing was substantially rehabilitated.
The body of evidence shows that the following are measurable indicators of the relationship between housing
and health:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Illnesses related to physical and chemical exposures in the housing unit such as lead and radon (Sandel
et al. 2010; Krieger 2010);
Illnesses related to biological exposures in the housing unit e.g. mold, dust mites and cockroaches (Chew
et al. 2006);
Adverse  impact of substandard housing on residents’ mental health such as anxiety and depression
(Blackman et al. 2001; Halpern 1995);
Psychological  impact related to improved housing (Gibson et al. 2011; Kearns et al. 2000; Dunn 2002);
and
Physical characteristics of the housing unit that contribute to improved health such as design, indoor air
quality, overcrowding, etc. (Northridge et al. 2010; Hood 2005).

This study reports on the health outcomes of improved housing on Habitat for Humanity, Indiana home owners.
Using a mailed survey the study sought self-reported responses from home owners on the before and after
effects of home ownership on their health, documenting neighborhood and housing effects as well as  impact on
the physical and psychological health and self-esteem of home owners.
In a review of 13 articles by Acevedo‐Garcia et al. (2004) on five housing mobility program, the authors
concluded that while housing mobility holds the potential to improve the health of households they lamented the
sparse literature on the subject and the absence of methodologically sound procedures in the published
literature. This paper adds to the volume of literature on housing mobility and health and adopts a rigorous
logistic regression methodology to the analysis of the data. The findings show a strong and significant
relationship in health outcomes for low income households following housing improvements.

Abstract Index #: 195
HIPPETOWNS
Abstract System ID#: 42
Individual Paper
GABER, John [university of Arkansas] jgaber@uark.edu
Hippietowns are alive and well and exist all over the world. Hippietowns are comminuty with local governments
that have an active “hippie” agenda and use public funds to achieve these goals. The term "hippie" is a popular
media catchphrase to describe people during the 1960s who shared a series of “countercultural values” that
emphasized freedom, peace, love, and a respect for others and the earth” (Stone, 2000, p. 13, Wolfe, 1968, p.
11). Hippietowns can be understood as a community of individuals who “have structured society according to
their interest and values” (Castells, 1986, p. 303). These countercultural values have been translated to real
planning guidelines that affect the day-to-day policy making in these comminuty. Similar to Pierre Clavel’s

"progressive city" (1986, p.9) where people with a “progressive stance” took over mayoral offices and city
councils to advance their agenda, Hippietowns governmental guidelines can be understood as being at the
middle of the three-way policy intersection of: progressive governance, organic economics, and environment
stewardship. It is the unique combination of working outside of the norms of “mainstream” society and planning
for achieving progressive social and environment goals which I focus on in hippietowns.
Hippietowns are not communes. Communes are “at least five adults plus two children living together and selfidentified in quasi-kinship terms” (Bennett, 198, p.6) out on the extreme rural fringe (e.g. The Farm, in
Tennessee). Hippietowns are real places actively seeking “an orderly revolution of positive change” and can be
seen in Bisbee, AZ, Arcata, CA, and Eureka Springs, AR (McCleary, 2002, p. 114). A good example of hippietown
policy would be in Arcata, California which is the first U.S city in 2004 to ban the growth of any type of Genetically
Modified Organism within the city limits (City of Arcata, Ordinance 1448).
This paper provides preliminary findings of an exploratory mixed method research project (Gaber and Gaber,
2007) into the world of hippietowns. It begins with defining hippietowns within the planning literature of Urban
Villagers by Herbert Gans (1982); The City and Grassroots by Manuel Castells (1983); and, The Progressive City, by
Pierre Clavel (1986). With this theoretical guide in hand, I then provide an overview of the hippietown case study
investigation in Eureka Springs, Arkansas, USA. The intent of this paper is to learn from the outlying practices of
hippietowns as a part of a ‘best-practice” approach to better understand planning and local policy making.
Bibliography Outside of the 5 Required References:
Berger, Bennett. 1967. “Hippie Morality – More Old than New,” in Trans-action, 5(2), pp. 19-27.
Gaber, John and Sharon Gaber. 2007. Qualitative Analysis for Planning & Policy, Chicago: IL, Planners Press.
Stone, Skip 2000. Hippies from A to Z, Silver City: NM, Hip, Inc.
Wolfe, Tom. 1968. The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test, New York: NY, Picador.
References
 Berger, Bennett. 1981. The Survival of Counterculture: Ideological work and everyday life among rural
communards, Berkeley: University of California Press.
 Castells, Manuel. 1986. The City and the Grassroots, Berkeley: CA, The University of California Press.
 Clavel, Pierre. The Progressive City: Planning and Participation, New Brunswick: NJ, Rutgers University
Press.
 Gans, Herbert. 1982 The Urban Villagers, New York: NY, Free Press.
 McClearly. 2002. The Hippie Dictionary. Berkeley: CA. Ten Speed Press.

Abstract Index #: 196
IS HOMEOWNERSHIP THE ‘AMERICAN DREAM’ AMONG LOW-INCOME AFRICAN AMERICANS IN JACKSON,
MISSISSIPPI?
Abstract System ID#: 47
Individual Paper
THOMAS, Talya [Jackson State University] talyat01@aol.com
The Housing Act of 1949 called for a “decent home and suitable living environment” for every American (Lang
and Sohmer, 2000). Since this act, homeownership has been labeled as the “American Dream” due to
opportunity, personal fulfillment, a financial safety net, and a secure retirement. In lieu of these benefits, why is
there a gap between White Americans and African Americans in homeownership? Low-income status in the
United States varies significantly by race. More than 13.4 million families are living on incomes less than 200% of
the federal poverty level and 22% are African Americans. One government program that was deleterious and had
a disproportionate impact on the African American community of central city neighborhood was entitled Urban
Renewal. It is estimated that Urban renewal displaced one million individuals from the time of its enactment in
1949 to 1965. The impact on African American comminuty was so disproportionate that the program earned

the nickname “Negro Removal (Goetz, 2013). This program was displacing families and disrupting comminuty
nationwide.
Housing is central to participation in the economic mainstream, but since the recession, this hasn’t been so. As
the numbers for homeownership continue to decrease, it has made it harder for low-income African Americans
to purchase a home. This research will investigate information regarding homeownership still being the
“American Dream” and whether the dream is still prevalent among low-income African Americans. It will focus
specifically on the population in the city of Jackson and the surrounding metropolitan area. Surveys and focus
groups will be conducted to verify that homeownership among low-income African Americans can still be the
“American Dream.”
References
 The State of Black America, 2001 Cochran, J. Thomas. 2012. America’s Homeownership Gap. United
States Conference of Mayors: Washington, DC.
 Anne B. Shlay, 2006 Reed, William. 2012. Homeownership Dream Fading Away. Hudson Valley Press
Online.
 Goetz, Edward G. 2013. New Deal Ruins: Race, Economic Justice and Public Housing Policy. Cornell
University Press: Ithaca, NY.

Abstract Index #: 197
THE PARTNERING GOVERNMENT AND UTILIZATION OF LAND BANKS
Abstract System ID#: 52
Individual Paper
FUJII, Yasuyuki [The University of Tokyo] ysykfj@up.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Inspired by the successes of Michigan and Ohio, many U.S. states with depopulated great city enacted state
legislation to establish a land bank which copes with vacant properties. As the primary tax foreclosing entity,
county governments play a key role in land banking. Many of the recently-established land banks are a county
authority or a countywide public-mission nonprofit. city also often create land banks as an organization or a
government program. Except for county-city consolidated municipalities, city needs to collaborate with
counties who handle tax foreclosures and tax auctions.
This paper discusses how to induce the potential of land banks according to their structure and partnering
government. Land banks are classified into five types: county-established, city-established, jointly established by
county and city, outer agency for a county (up here, all legislation-based), and non- legislative.
Land banks, irrespective of types, need to actively engage in  land_use and community development. Realignment
of  land_use is critical in a severely depopulated city. The venues of community development are usually low and
moderate income neighborhood where the issues of vacant and abandoned properties are prominent.
For county-established land banks, partnership with the core city is essential. Counties are more suitably
positioned than city to work on regional governance and metropolitan  land_use. On the other hand, cityestablished land banks are closer to local partners to repurpose unused properties in accordance with a city’s
master plan and community development goals. City land banks frequently communicate with various city
departments which are concerned with vacant properties. County-city-joint land banks are expected to combine
the county’s strengths and city’s strengths. Agent-land banks retain broad discretion over property acquisitions
and dispositions and over how they interact with for-profit and nonprofit developers and lenders. Non-legislative
land banks and land bank program may lack legal power, but nonetheless sometimes function well when they
target neighborhood that are relatively less deprived.
The performance of land banks is affected by various factors – legal, political, organizational as well as the local
real estate market. Some factors are controllable for land banks while some others are uncontrollable, as they
are contextual ones. We should be reminded that even contextual factors – for instance, the enactment of state

land bank law – may change in the future. Case studies for each land bank type will be conducted with a focus on
how land banks work with the partnering government as well as other public actors and private businesses by
dealing with controllable and uncontrollable factors in their activities.
References
 Dewar, Margaret, Eric Seymour, and Oana Druta. 2014. “Disinvesting in the city: The role of tax
foreclosure in Detroit.” Urban Affairs Review, published online 7 October 2014.
 Fitzpatrick IV, Thomas J. 2010. “Ohio’s land bank legislation: Modernizing an aged model.” Journal of
Affordable Housing and Community Development Law 19 (3): 127-47.
 Fujii, Yasuyuki. 2014. “Second best ways to repurpose abandoned and vacant properties without a land
bank.” The ACSP 54th Annual Conference paper. Philadelphia, United States. October 30, 2014.
 Heins, Payton, and Tarik Abdelazim. 2014. “Take it to the bank: How land banks are strengthening
America’s neighborhood.” Center for Community Progress.
 Thomson, Dale E. 2011. “Strategic geographic targeting in community development: Examining the
congruence of political, institutional, and technical factors.” Urban Affairs Review 47 (4): 564-94.

Abstract Index #: 198
REVIVED NEARLY 50 YEARS LATER: THE CHALLENGES OF EXPANDING EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR
SECTION 3 RESIDENTS WITH CRIMINAL RECORDS
Abstract System ID#: 116
Individual Paper
WALTER, Rebecca [University of Texas at San Antonio] Rebecca.Walter@utsa.edu, presenting author, primary
author
CAUDY, Michael [The University of Texas at San Antonio] Michael.Caudy@utsa.edu
RAY, James [The University of Texas at San Antonio] James.Ray@utsa.edu
Section 3 was established in the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 to provide employment for public
housing residents in distressed comminuty while rebuilding underserved neighborhood. Today, Section 3
requires recipients of HUD funding to offer employment and economic opportunities to low-income residents
and minority-owned businesses. The resurgence of Section 3, kindled by the American Reinvestment and
Recovery Act of 2009, has encouraged HUD funding recipients to implement strategic procedures and program
to meet provision guidelines. As direct recipients of HUD funding, public housing authorities are not only finding
new ways to comply with the minimum requirements, but are using the provision as a way to combat extreme
poverty for their residents (Reckdahl, 2014).
Recipients of HUD funding that are required to meet the provision guidelines have identified a considerable
number of barriers that prevent low-income residents with criminal records from securing employment. Exoffenders are encouraged to participate in apprenticeship and job training program but are often unable to
obtain employment because of restrictive practices that limit opportunities. This is problematic as previous
research has found that low-income ex-offenders unable to secure stable employment are more likely to
recidivate (Visher, Debus, & Yahner, 2008) and gaining stable employment has been identified as a potential
turning point that may foster desistance from crime (Laub & Sampson, 2001). Barriers to employment for Section
3 residents with criminal records are not an isolated phenomenon. Policy recommendations and research
evaluating the issue are sparse even though the problem is prevalent in comminuty nationwide. With over $12
billion of applicable HUD Section 3 funding streams and more than 5,000 direct recipients of this funding, almost
every community in America is faced with this challenge (Strengthening the Effectiveness of Section 3, 2009).
Section 3 has rarely been discussed in the literature and the challenge of expanding economic opportunity for
arguably the most vulnerable Section 3 population, ex-offenders, has been ignored. This research is timely as
HUD recently revived the nearly fifty year old Section 3 provision under the American Reinvestment and Recovery
Act of 2009 and HUD recipients have been unequivocally implementing procedural measures to be in compliance
with the provision. Furthermore, the U.S. Sentencing Commission’s vote over the summer of 2014 to reduce

sentencing for federal drug trafficking offenders is likely to grant thousands of prisoners an earlier return to their
families and society by the end of 2015. These prisoners often return to distressed neighborhood (Morenoff &
Harding, 2011) and are likely eligible to register as a Section 3 resident. Developing effective solutions to expand
employment opportunities for returning citizens is necessary for successful reentry.
Using San Antonio, Texas as a case study, a qualitative analysis is conducted to answer the following research
questions: To what extent do existing practices create barriers to employment for Section 3 residents with
criminal records? What are the underlying structural conditions that preserve these barriers? How can
employment opportunities for Section 3 residents with criminal backgrounds be expanded? The current policy
review and case study examines the extent to which policy may exclude otherwise eligible participants because
of their criminal record. Fundamental challenges creating obstacles to employment are identified and discussed.
Finally, a research agenda to better understand the impact of Section 3 and how economic opportunities can be
expanded for low-income individuals with criminal records is proposed.
References
 Laub, J. H., & Sampson, R. J. (2001). Understanding desistance from crime. Crime and Justice, 28, 1-69.
 Morenoff, J. D., & Harding, D. J. (2011). Final technical report: neighborhood, recidivism, and
employment among returning prisoners. Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social Research, University of
Michigan.
 Reckdahl, K. (2014, October 2). Lifting the fog on Section 3. Shelterforce. Retrieved from
http://www.shelterforce.org/article/3878/ lifting_the_fog_on_section_3/
 Strengthening the Effectiveness of Section 3: Hearing before the Subcommittee on Housing and
Community Opportunity, Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development (2009) (testimony of John D. Trasvina). Retrieved from
http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/press/testimonies/2009/2009-07-20b
 Visher, C., Debus, S., & Yahner, J. (2008). Employment after prison: A longitudinal study of releasees in
three states. Washington, DC: Urban Institute. Retrieved from
http://www.urban.org/UploadedPDF/411778_employment_after_prison.pdf

Abstract Index #: 199
DIFFERENT SHADES OF CHANGE: THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN GENTRIFICATION TRENDS AND HISTORIC
DISTRICTS IN LOS ANGELES.
Abstract System ID#: 122
Individual Paper
GORSKA, Karolina [University of California, Los Angeles] kgorska@ucla.edu
The designation of historic districts is embraced by numerous localities as a tool in the management of
neighborhood preservation, community economic development, and revitalization (Zahirovic-Herbert and
Chatterjee 2012; Listokin et al. 1998; Rypkema 1994). However, criticism has arisen that designation can
accelerate property values and rents, which can lead to gentrification and displacement (Zahirovic-Herbert and
Chatterjee 2012; Smith 1998). Although there are assertions that community and economic benefits accompany
historic district designation (Diaz et al. 2008; NYC Independent Budget Office 2003; Getty Conservancy 2001),
they come from different socio-demographic and cultural contexts than Los Angeles. Up until now, no study has
examined the  impact and socioeconomic changes that occur within Los Angeles’ historic districts subsequent to
their designation.
This dissertation examined the effect of Historic Preservation Overlay Zones (HPOZs) on neighborhood change
and gentrification in the city of Los Angeles. The work focused around three questions: (1) What physical, social,
and economic changes can be attributed to historic designation? (2) Do HPOZ residents experience
gentrification? (3) Has preservation been an agent of change or “no-change?”

Briefly, the theoretical literature shows that significant socioeconomic changes do occur in revitalized historic
neighborhoods (Freeman 2006; Schill and Nathan 1983), however the relationship between historic designation
and gentrification is inconclusive (Leimenstoll 1998; Gale 1991). Certain studies have observed that poor
households in gentrifying neighborhood are actually less likely to move than those in non-gentrifying
neighborhoods (Freeman & Braconi 2004). Interestingly, in these studies, a number of gentrifying neighborhood
were designated historic districts, such as Harlem’s Clinton Hill. Other studies revealed that rather than spurring
displacement, revitalization in certain historic neighborhood has maintained economic and racial diversity
(Rypkema 2004, Nyden 1998).
Finally, as Florida (2013) points out, L.A. does not conform to a typical urban-suburban pattern. Creative class
pockets can be found throughout the city (near universities, the coast, or downtown), while the service and
working classes tend to reside on the periphery of the major creative clusters. The HPOZs are spread throughout
the city and fall into different class clusters with over half located in either service or working class area. Thus,
studying the  impact of HPOZs provides an interesting comparison and counterpoint to the current literature that
mostly examines the effect of such districts and gentrification in strongly centered urban regions, like New York.
The paper employs a mixed-methods approach that combines a quantitative analysis of the socioeconomic
characteristics of the HPOZs before and after designation along with five in-depth case studies. The
socioeconomic characteristics of the 29 HPOZs are compared to city and county trends from 1970 to 2010 using
principal component analysis. The three research stages include: 1) analysis of socioeconomic trends present
before and after designation; 2) development of a typology of the different neighborhood that are designated
HPOZs; and 3) selection of case studies from different typologies.
The research is complete and the findings show: 1) the diversity of designated area and 2) reveals how the
benefits and disadvantages of historic designation differ by neighborhood. Although the case study
neighborhoods ranged from low, middle, to upper income area (Black, White, and Latino), they all experienced
varying degrees of gentrification or ascension—from super-gentrification (Lees 2003) to an influx of urban
pioneers into low-income comminuty (Mollenkopf 1983). Also, for Lower and Middle-Class area preservation
was seen (and used) as an agent of change, while in in wealthier area preservation reinforced the status quo.
This information helps planners identify policy area for improvements, in particular the need for preservation to
respond to diverse needs and to maintain mixed-income comminuty.
References
 Florida, Richard. 2013. “Class-Divided city: Los Angeles Edition,” The Atlantic city Place Matters
website. http://www.theatlanticcities.com/neighborhoods/2013/01/class-divided-cities-los-angelesedition/4296/. Accessed February 10, 2013
 Freeman, L. 2006. There Goes the ‘Hood. Views of Gentrification from the Ground Up. Temple University
Press: Philadelphia.
 Gale, Dennis. 1991. “The  impact of Historic District Designation,” Journal of the American Planning
Association, 57 (3), Summer: 325-340.
 Rypkema, D. 2004. “The oversimplification of gentrification.” Forum Journal, 26-34.
 Smith, N. 1998. Comment: the contributions of historic preservation to housing and economic
development, Housing Policy Debate, 9, pp. 479–485.

Abstract Index #: 200
FIGHTING FORECLOSURE: AN EXAMINATION OF THE EFFECTS OF A VACANCY ORDINANCE IN THE OLDER
SUBURBS OF CLEVELAND
Abstract System ID#: 125
Individual Paper
HANLON, Bernadette [The Ohio State University] hanlon.42@osu.edu, presenting author, primary author
AIRGOOD-OBRYCKI, Whitney [Ohio State University] airgood-obrycki.1@buckeyemail.osu.edu

The concentration of foreclosures and large numbers of real estate owned properties (REO) has tremendous
negative spillover effects on urban neighborhood. For instance, foreclosed homes can reduce the sales price of
nearby homes (Whitaker and Fitzpatrick, 2011) and those that are vacant for long periods of time increase public
service costs for municipal governments (Agpar, Duda and Gorey, 2005). Recent work identifies the nature and
extent of foreclosure in suburban comminuty, suggesting a strong relationship between foreclosure and
suburban poverty (Schildt, Cytron, Kneebone, and Reid, 2013). As Schafran (2013, 665) notes in his examination
of the geography of foreclosures in the San Francisco Bay area, “certain places are at the center of the
[foreclosure crisis] for a reason.” In this paper, we suggest the story of foreclosure is also a contributing story
about the slow decline of older suburbs, especially those outside city such as Cleveland that experienced large
scale economic restructuring in recent decades. Some local jurisdictions of older suburbs in Cleveland are fighting
back by developing vacancy ordinances to ensure banks and others register vacant houses, keep properties well
maintained, and prevent the selling of foreclosed properties in poor condition. For instance, in 2010, South
Euclid, a struggling older suburb of Cleveland, introduced a vacancy ordinance with an escrow hold requiring
purchasers of foreclosed homes to make any necessary repairs if violations of the local housing code were
identified. Using spatial statistics, including spatial linear regression analysis, we find that such vacancy
ordinances have helped stabilize property values and improve property conditions in older suburbs in Cleveland,
particularly in the case of South Euclid. The findings from our paper also suggest that more needs to be done to
help protect older suburbs from the negative  impact of the foreclosure crisis.
References
 Apgar, W. C, M., Duda, and R. Gorey. (2005). The municipal cost of foreclosures: A Chicago case study.
Minneapolis, MN: Homeownership Preservation Foundation.
 Schildt, C., Cytron, N., Kneebone, E., & Reid, C. (2013). The subprime crisis in suburbia: exploring the
links between foreclosures and suburban poverty. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper,
2.
 Whitaker, S., and T.J. Fitzpatrick IV. (2011). The impact of vacant, tax-delinquent and foreclosed property
on sales prices of neighboring homes. Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. Working Paper No. 1123R.
Cleveland, OH: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.

Abstract Index #: 201
HOW AFFORDABLE IS HUD AFFORDABLE HOUSING?
Abstract System ID#: 126
Individual Paper
EWING, Reid [University of Utah] ewing@arch.utah.edu, presenting author, primary author
HAMIDI, Shima [University of Utah] shima.hamidi@gmail.com
The United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)’s measure of housing affordability is
the most widely used and the most conventional measure of housing affordability. According to the HUD
measure, total housing costs at or below 30% of gross annual income are affordable. This is often considered as
the definition of housing affordability and has shaped views of who has affordability problems, the severity of
problems, and the extent of the problems. It is simple to compute and the raw data is easily available from a few
recognized sources such as the U.S. Census Bureau, the American Housing Survey.
The HUD measure is also the legislative standard used to qualify applicants for housing assistance. It is used in the
administration of rental housing subsidies, such as the Section 8 housing vouchers. Under these program,
participants can pay no less than 30 percent, and no more than 40 percent, of their adjusted income toward
housing rent. We can assume, therefore, that housing costs alone are affordable for households participating in
HUD rental assistance program. But is the housing under HUD rental assistance program still affordable when
taking into account the transportation costs?
This paper assesses the affordability of HUD rental assistance properties from the standpoint of transportation
costs. HUD housing is, by definition, affordable from the standpoint of housing costs due to limits on the amounts

renters are required to pay. However, there are no such limitations on transportation costs, and common sense
suggests that renters in remote locations may be forced to pay more than 15 percent of income, a nominal
affordability standard, for transportation costs. Using household travel models estimated with data from 15
diverse regions around the U.S., we estimated and summed automobile capital costs, automobile operating
costs, and transit fare costs for households at more than 18,000 HUD rental assistance properties. The mean
percentage of income expended on transportation is 15 percent for households at the high end of the eligible
income scale. However, in highly sprawling metropolitan area, and in suburban area of more compact
metropolitan area, much higher percentages of households exceed the 15 percent threshold. This suggests that
locational characteristics of properties should be considered by HUD when establishing eligibility for rental
assistance subsidies.
References
 Abt Associates Inc. (2010). A Methodological Review of the Center for Neighborhood Technology’s
Housing + Transportation Affordability Index.

Abstract Index #: 202
FACTORS INFLUENCING URBAN REGENERATION: AN ANALYSIS OF CONVERSION OF NON-VACANT  land_useS
TO VACANT
Abstract System ID#: 131
Individual Paper
KIM, Boah [Texas A&M University.] boahboah@tamu.edu
Neighborhood decline due to abandonment and vacancies is not only a problem in depopulating legacy city in
the United States, it is also an important issue facing many growing urban area experiencing amplification of
sprawl toward the urban fringe. Expanding city which show population increases tend to report higher ratios of
vacant land than legacy city (Pagano and Bowman, 2004). Fort Worth, TX, is a representative growing urban
area with elastic boundaries and increased population. Spatial analyses examining vacant land patterns in Fort
Worth from 1990-2010 showed that the distribution of vacant parcels has shifted from being scattered along the
periphery to being concentrated in the urban core. Once vacant parcels which were converted to non-vacant
uses were located on the periphery while the opposite was occurring closer to the Central Business District (CBD.
In addition, the average vacant parcel size tended to significantly decreasing over time. While civic expansion can
result vacant land area increases, in the case of Fort Worth, population out-migrations and rapid peripheral
development converted these vacant lands to active uses. The overall amount of vacant parcels increased in the
city while the actual acreage of vacant land decreased. This process has led to difficulties in regeneration of the
urban core located vacant parcels based on their irregular shape, minute size, and disconnected nature.
Based on these findings, this research focuses on the evaluating the factors which contribute to the conversion of
a non-vacant parcel to vacant. Two sets of data were analyzed: 1) parcels converting from residential to vacant
(set1) and 2) parcels converting from vacant to residential (set2). The conversion of each parcel’s  land_use status
was assessed using variables related to physical characteristics (e.g. size of parcel, age of parcel, structure
counts), spatial characteristics (e.g. distance from CBD) and economic characteristics (e.g. appraised value).
Using the occurrence of vacant and abandoned properties as a measurable indicator, this research hypothesizes
that the conversion of a parcel from vacant to non-vacant 1) will have a significant relationship with larger parcel
size; 2) will be located at a further proximity/distance from the CBD; 3) will have a significant relationship with
the younger age of parcels and number of structures; and 4) will have significant relationship with high appraised
parcel value.
The data for this research includes all residential parcels within the study area. Longitudinal data over a twentyyear span was collected and assessed in ten-year periods on a parcel level from 1990 to 2010. This research used
a multinomial logit model due to the outcome of this research had eight different categorization of  land_use

conversion patterns depending on the length of vacancy or activation. Results of set 1, examining parcels which
converted from non-vacant to vacant, show that a statistically significant relationship with an increased number
of new constructions built and distance from CBD. Results of set 2 show that a statistically significant relationship
with a decreased number of constructions, a younger age of parcels, and larger size of parcel. Overall, this
research shows that the parcels that become vacant tend to be new constructions with higher appraised values.
Size of parcel did not prove to be significant when converting from non-vacant to vacant but had a significant
relationship when converting from vacant to non-vacant.
References
 Accordino, J., & Johnson, G. T. (2000). Addressing the Vacant and Abandoned Property Problem. Journal
of Urban Affairs, 22 (3), 301-315.
 Bowman, A. O., & Pagano, M. A. (2000). Transforming America's city: policy and Conditions of Vacant
Land. Urban Affairs Review, 35 (4), 559-581.
 Bowman, A. O., & Pagano, M. A. (2004). Terra Incognita: Vacant Land and Urban Strategies. Washington,
D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
 Center for Community Progress. (2013). Key facts about vacant, abandoned, foreclosed, and problem
properties in the U.S.
 Singer, J. D., & B.Willett, J. (2003). Applied Longitudinal Data Analysis. Oxford University Press.

Abstract Index #: 203
TRANSFORMATIVE PARTNERSHIPS IN urban_planning; THE STOREFRONT'S RESIDENT-LED MODEL FOR
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT AND TOWER RENEWAL IN TORONTO
Abstract System ID#: 149
Individual Paper
MODLINSKA, Ewa [University of Toronto] ewa.modlinska@mail.utoronto.ca
In a time when the merits for community engagement in urban_planning are generally well established, the next
question that is posed is what kind of engagement process would provide the space for people to shape their
neighbourhoods and their city. This paper explores a collaborative partnership model, called the
Community.Design.Initiative. (CDI), that was used to successfully engage residents in the revitalization of
apartment towers in a lower-income and immigrant community in Toronto. The CDI emerged from an ongoing
partnership between a local community organization (the East Scarborough Storefront), a design think tank
(archiTEXT), two architecture firms (Sustainable.TO and ERA Architects), and most importantly, community
residents. Starting as an initiative to redesign the building of a local community center (The East Scarborough
Storefront), the CDI grew to become a resident-led community development initiative, which successfully
received funding under the City of Toronto Tower Renewal Program. This Program was established by City
Council in 2010 to address the aging and inefficient nature of over one thousand Toronto residential apartment
towers built in the 1950s to 1980s (City of Toronto 2014).
To better understand the CDI process and the reasons for its success within the Tower Renewal Program, three
main points of research analysis are discussed in this paper: (1) what kinds of partnerships were formed through
the CDI and the work of the East Scarborough Storefront; (2) how does the CDI process differ from the traditional
opportunities provided by the City of Toronto for public input; and (3) what role did 'sustainability' play in the
development of the CDI as well as the work undertaken through the CDI. This research is informed by David
Harvey's (1973, 1996) 'right to the city' and the social justice orientations of 'sustainability', as explored by
Fainstein (2011), Agyeman (2003), and Marcuse et al. (2009). Building on this literature, emphasis is placed on
viewing urban policy as a transformative force that can be utilized to resist unjust urban conditions and to bring
forth a re-imagined city based on equity, democracy and diversity (Connolly and Steil 2009). The methodological
framework used in this research is policy analysis, discourse analysis and semi-structured interviews with key
informants. Based on a review of websites, City of Toronto policy documents, and Storefront reports, as well as
interviews, the Community.Design.Initiative. Can be viewed as a transformative community engagement process
that provided the space for residents to not only voice their vision for the neighbourhood but also to gain the

skills and build the partnerships necessary to make their vision into a reality. This research was undertaken
independent of collaboration or supervision with a faculty member.
References
 Harvey, D. (1973). Social justice and the city. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
 Harvey, D. (1996). Justice, nature and the geography of difference. Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishers.
 Fainstein, S. (2011). The just city. New York: Cornell University Press.
 Agyeman, J., Bullard, R., & Evans, B. (2003). Just sustainabilities: Development in an unequal world.
Boston: MIT Press.
 Connolly, J., & Steil, J. (2009). Introduction: Finding justice in the city (1-16). In Marcuse, P., Connolly, J.,
Novy, J., Olivo, I., Potter, C., & Steil, J. (2009). Searching for the just city; Debates in urban theory and
practice. Oxon: Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 204
THE NEW GROWTH COALITION: PHILANTHROPY AND URBAN REVITALIZATION IN US LEGACY city 1990PRESENT
Abstract System ID#: 172
Pre-organized Session: Legacy city: The Quest for Revitalization
ROCCO, Mary [University of Pennsylvania] mrocc@design.upenn.edu
In the past three decades, non-profit organizations (NPOs) in US Legacy city have often become leaders in
urban revitalization, responding to the consequences of their city’ economic restructuring and depopulation.
This phenomenon, coupled with reductions in federal funding for low income housing production and local
economic development, has resulted in important changes in the composition of growth coalition, as new
characters have joined the institutional ecology of those remaking these places. Where in earlier years, the
power players were local business elites, mayors, newspaper editors, today the group has grown to include
leaders of NPOs, anchor institutions and philanthropic foundations (Logan and Molotch 1987).
Serving as supporters and collaborators in urban revitalization-focused NPO work, philanthropic foundations
have grown in importance as they committed millions of dollars to urban improvements. In addition, they
incubated organizations, increased the capacity of local leaders, and collaborated with financial institutions to
leverage capital for projects (Erickson 2009; Frisch and Servon 2006; Karlstrom et al 2007). As strong partners
with NPOs and the public sector, their presence is thus challenging the traditional concept of the urban growth
coalition
Many scholars have documented changes in the growth coalition over time. Some have explored the rise of
NPOs from relatively powerless neighborhood-based groups to potent political actors (Marwell 2007). Others
have demonstrated the entry of “eds and meds” and others in urban revitalization activities (Birch et al 2013).
However, no one has shown philanthropic foundations have and are influencing revitalization. The result is an
inadequate understanding of the dynamics of 21st century urban revitalization.
To remedy this gap, this study examines the role of philanthropic foundations in urban revitalization in Legacy
Cities between 1990-2013. It assesses the level and nature of philanthropic grant making in 50 city, it compares
philanthropic funding with CDBG allocations and identifies the recipients of foundation funding. Preliminary
findings reveal that over the past ten years, foundations have allocated $6.9 billion to urban revitalization, 125%
of total CDBG funding in this period. The findings also show that in one class of city, philanthropic expenditures
are not only important in terms of their quantity but also likely help reshape the growth coalition but in other
types of city the funding is less significant. For example, in large- and medium-sized city (population above
250,000), foundation funding surpasses federal community development block grants (CDBG) by 145%. Further,
their grant recipients tend to be intermediary institutions and local development organizations, the new players
in today’s growth coalitions. In contrast, philanthropy seems to be less important in small city (populations of
less than 250,000), where CDBG exceeds philanthropic expenditure and grant recipients tend to be city and

county governments and public agencies, most often school districts. Finally, the early results show that while
city size explains high levels of philanthropic expenditures, the presence of foundations in a city matters more.
Furthermore, when per capita philanthropic expenditure is measured against poverty rate in each city, the
presence of foundations is a greater determinant of higher levels of grant making. When taken together, these
findings suggest that in some Legacy city, philanthropic foundations are attempting to resuscitate growth
machine conditions through investment in NPO-led urban revitalization. Whether they are providing support to a
NPO industry focused on revitalization or a beleaguered public sector, philanthropic foundation activity mimics
that attributed to traditional growth coalition interests. In Legacy city, philanthropic foundations have partially
replaced the position of strong business elite to form a new growth coalition.
References
 Birch, Eugenie, David C. Perry, and Henry Louis Taylor Jr. "Universities as Anchor Institutions." Journal of
Higher Education Outreach and Engagement 17, no. 3 (2013): 7-16.
 Erickson, David J. The Housing Policy Revolution: Networks and neighborhood. Urban Institute Press,
2009. and Frisch, Michael, and Lisa J. Servon. "CDCs and the changing context for urban community
development: A review of the field and the environment." Community Development 37, no. 4 (2006):
88-108.
 Karlstrom, Karl, Prudence Brown, Robert Chaskin and Harold Richman. “Embedded philanthropy and
community change.” University of Chicago, Chapin Hall Center for Children: Issue Brief #114, 2007.
 Logan, John, and Harvey Molotch. "Urban fortunes." The Political Economy of Place. Berkeley, University
of California (1987).
 Marwell, Nicole P. Bargaining for Brooklyn: Community organizations in the entrepreneurial city.
University of Chicago Press, 2009.

Abstract Index #: 205
LEARNING FROM DETROIT
Abstract System ID#: 175
Pre-organized Session: Learning from Detroit
DEWAR, Margaret [University of Michigan] medewar@umich.edu, presenting author, primary author
ELLIOTT, Meagan [University of Michigan] meaganmi@umich.edu
SEYMOUR, Eric [University of Michigan] eseymour@umich.edu
COOPER-MCCANN, Patrick [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] pcooperm@umich.edu
WEBER, Matthew [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] matweber@umich.edu
Detroit’s experiences have long mirrored those of many city: rising industrialization and population growth in
the early twentieth century, suburbanization of industry and of white population following World War II,
industrial restructuring that dismantled the region’s economic base from the 1970s on, and racial tensions
throughout that hindered regional progress. Today, however, Detroit stands alone among large American city
in both the depth and breadth of its distress. Thousands of homes and many acres of land are vacant and
abandoned. Residents are disproportionately poor and racially segregated. The tax base is decimated. What can
scholars and practitioners learn about urban processes and planning from research on such an outlier city? We
argue, based on examination of literature, that research on Detroit can advance understanding of city and
urban_planning because of its extreme conditions. Researchers, for example, are able to observe phenomena in
Detroit that likely exist elsewhere but go unnoticed. The magnifying effects of the city’s decline make the invisible
visible. Detroit also allows researchers to untangle certain phenomena, such as gentrification, from the context of
growth where they are usually observed, casting those phenomena in a new light. The large swaths of vacant
urban land in Detroit are also an asset to researchers. They allow testing of hypotheses that would be difficult to
assess in more intact, densely populated area. Such research can have broad application to heavily developed
urban area elsewhere. Furthermore, Detroit research can expose the shortcomings of policy that presume
strong real estate markets but do not work as expected in disinvested neighborhood where property demand is
very weak. Detroit’s extreme conditions also pose a challenge for some of the disciplines that contribute to
urban_planning. These disciplines have tended to focus on how and why city and regions grow, who benefits

when they do, and how to renew growth when it ebbs. Not enough attention has been paid to understanding
decline. Scholars have figuratively modeled urban phenomena only across the range that variables exhibit during
growth, leaving out the range during decline. The challenge that Detroit poses for urban studies is to flesh out
that model – to understand the spatial, social, political and economic dynamics of change and how decline may
differ from growth.
References
 Beauregard, R. A. (2011). “Radical Uniqueness and the Flight from Urban Theory.” In D. R. Judd and D.
Simpson (Eds.), The City, Revisited (pp. 186-202). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
 Bockmeyer, J. L. (2000). “A Culture of Distrust.” Urban Studies, 37(13), 2417-40.
 Dewar, M., and J. M. Thomas (2013) The City After Abandonment. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press.
 Galster, G. C. (2012). Driving Detroit: The Quest for Respect in Motown. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press.
 Logan, J. R., & Molotch, H. L. (1987). Urban fortunes: The Political Economy of Place. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.

Abstract Index #: 206
PRIVATIZATION OF CHICAGO'S PUBLIC HOUSING IN THE MIDST OF RECESSION
Abstract System ID#: 176
Pre-organized Session: High Hopes vs. Reality in Public Housing Reforms
KHARE, Amy [University of Chicago] akhare@uchicago.edu
Background: Public policy since mid-1990s, such as HUD’s HOPE VI, aim to deliver affordable rental units in
mixed-income housing developments and to catalyze neighborhood redevelopment through privatizing public
property in select urban area. The underlying rationale for these privatization reforms suggests that market
investment into the built environment of places long associated with concentrated poverty is necessary because
public-sector interventions have failed. If urban neighborhood are to be radically reshaped, then a significant
portion of public housing units and the renters living in them will need to be replaced with market-rate housing
and related amenities that show potential for economic development.
When the 2007-2009 economic recession hit, however, financing for building the costly new housing became less
stable and the promised revitalization stalled. A shift in the economic context potentially altered the
redevelopment of urban neighborhood throughout the nation. Few empirical investigations have analyzed what
happens to these market-driven strategies during periods of sustained economic crisis. If macroeconomic forces
are creating heightened constraints in the overall housing market, what is the fate of mixed-income development
strategies during periods of economic downturn?
Methodology: The empirical case under investigation is the public housing reforms reflected in Chicago’s Plan for
Transformation. Privatization reforms occurred on a broader scale in Chicago than in any other city in the county:
over $1.5 billion in federal funding has produced more mixed-income developments than any other city in the
country. This paper uses a vertical and comparative case study design to allow Chicago’s reforms to be
investigated at multiple scales including the urban political economic context and within three neighborhood
where the mixed-income strategy is being implemented. The data sources employed include policy and financial
documents, as well as 90 transcripts of original interviews conducted between 2008-2014 with public officials,
policy advocates, housing developers and financial investors.
Findings: I employ Neo-Marxist and Neo-Institutionalist perspectives to explain the profit-driven nature of mixedincome development and to complicate assumptions about how the strategy leverages private financing. Rather,
findings demonstrate a deep dependence on government subsidies to develop both subsidized and market-rate
housing. First, the three sites are compared across factors (such as housing markets, neighborhood geographies,
and planning mechanisms) to demonstrate how the recession impacted the sites differently. Then, the role of

government actors shows extensive public sector influnce over the planned development of the sites. Most
importantly, the retainership of vacant land and role (or lack thereof) of government officials in neighborhood
planning results in heated debates about the most favorable use for public land that continues to be
undeveloped and under direct control of the public housing authority. Grocery stores, urban farms, tennis courts,
arts centers, and other amenities begin to be planned and developed as land swaps lead way to the physical
development of these non-housing related resources.
Relevance: This investigation takes on heightened relevance due to shifts in the economy, which arguably make
the mixed-income strategy harder to implement even as it is ascendant as a policy framework. Ultimately, the
study seeks to discover new approaches for revitalization reforms that offer more equitable benefits for lowincome households living in and around mixed-income housing redevelopments. Findings build on previous
historical accounts that document how urban politics influences the reshaping of urban neighborhood.
References
 Fraser, James, Deirdre Oakley, and Joshua Bazuin. 2012. “Public Ownership and Private Profit in
Housing.” Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society 5(3): 397-412.
 Goetz, Edward G. 2013. New Deal Ruins: Race, Economic Justice, and Public Housing Policy. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
 Hackworth, Jason. 2007. The Neoliberal City: Governance, Ideology, and Development in American
Urbanism. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
 Hanlon, James. 2010. “Success by design: HOPE VI, new urbanism, and the neoliberal transformation of
public housing in the United States.” Environment and Planning A 42:80-98.
 Smith, Janet L. 2013. “The end of US public housing as we knew it.” Urban Research & Practice 6(3): 276296.

Abstract Index #: 207
ASSESSING THE FEASIBILITY OF SIDE YARD program AS A SOLUTION TO LAND VACANCY IN U.S. SHRINKING
CITIES
Abstract System ID#: 187
Individual Paper
GANNING, Joanna [University of Utah] joanna.ganning@utah.edu, presenting author, primary author
TIGHE, J. Rosie [Cleveland State University] j.l.tighe@csuohio.edu
Scholars have recommended various strategies to combat land vacancy in shrinking city. Side yard program, in
which adjacent homeowners purchase vacant lots, represent one such solution. However, the feasibility of those
strategies have yet to be proven. Though costs associated with the purchase and maintenance of such properties
is usually minimal, affordability remains a challenge. The economic rationality of expending monies on land not
likely to provide a return on investment presents another challenge. Supply-side constraints also exist, primarily
through the guidelines land banks impose for participation in side lot program, and the pricing policy
implemented. Nevertheless, this issue is likely under-researched due to the dearth of available data and the lack
of standard definition of vacant land across the U.S. Thus, this study evaluates the side yard program’ potential
for reducing residential land vacancy, focusing on both demand-side constraints and supply-side challenges.
We use the case study city of St. Louis, Missouri to assess the feasibility of the existing side yard program across
three focus area (Census tracts) and the city as a whole. The city of St. Louis has lost 63% of population between
1950 and 2010 and its land vacancy rates are very high, especially in low-income neighborhood, which makes
the city appropriate as a case study city. The methodology involves identifying lots eligible for purchase through
the side yard program, and estimating the number of eligible buyers that could absorb that vacant land into side
yards through the local land bank. Potential side yards and eligible buyers were identified using the City of St.
Louis parcel database and GIS analysis. The results are presented according to possible program guideline
scenarios, including the policy in effect in March 2011 (the land vacancy data’s vintage), programmatic changes

that have been announced, and other possible iterations. Variables that can be altered include maximum
frontages, qualification of buyers, number of neighbors, and the affordability constraint.
The analysis reveals that while demand-side issues (i.e., affordability) exist, the supply-side barriers (i.e.,
restrictive guidelines and inequitable or illogical pricing structures) are the larger constraints for the program’s
success. In St. Louis, the land bank’s side yard program as of March 2011 could find buyers for up to 4.7% of
vacant residential lots, jumping to a maximum of 10.8% when the owner occupancy requirement is lifted for
buyers. Through a comparison of policy scenarios, we conclude that program policy significantly influences a
program’s potential success. State legislation regarding tax foreclosure auctions and elements of urban design
likely also influence program effectiveness. We hope that this evaluation of the feasibility of side yard program
in combatting residential land vacancy will lead to research on the feasibility of other strategies for
neighborhoods in shrinking city.

Abstract Index #: 208
METROPOLITAN HOUSING MARKET RESTRUCTURING AND IMPLICATIONS FOR POVERTY DECONCENTRATION:
THE EFFECTS OF FORECLOSURES ON THE SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER RESIDENCIES
Abstract System ID#: 1180
Individual Paper
LEE, Sang Won [Georgia Institute of Technology] slee388@gatech.edu
Over the past few decades, tenant-based housing assistance program, led by the Housing Choice Voucher (HCV)
program, have emerged as the dominant vehicle for assisted housing program in the U.S. The primary goal of
the HCV program is to spatially deconcentrate inner-city poverty by providing inner-city low-income households
with housing voucher subsidies, which would give these households greater spatial mobility and enable them to
access a wider range of private housing located preferably in lower-poverty neighborhood (Winnick, 1995).
However, in the wake of a major shock to housing markets – the foreclosure crisis – this goal of spatial poverty
deconcentration may have been impeded as countless HCV tenants are at risk of displacement due to rental
property foreclosures.
Though the initial outlook suggests that these displaced HCV tenants should have considerable difficulty in
finding alternative affordable housing in similar quality neighborhood, the outlook becomes ambiguous when
further examining the supply-side and demand-side effects of foreclosures and how they may result in the
increase (or decrease) of available affordable housing supply that rent to HCV households. From a supply-side
perspective, there is clear evidence that owner-occupied properties that have been foreclosed upon are
increasingly being converted into rental properties (Immergluck & Law, 2013), of which some should rent out to
HCV households (DiPasquale, 2011). However, from a demand-side perspective, it is generally understood that
numerous former homeowners have become renters, which drives up rental housing demand and reduces rental
housing vacancy rates (JCHS, 2013). The increase in rental housing demand should negatively impact the
availability of affordable rental housing as rental prices increase.
Given these conflicting arguments, this research paper endeavors to ascertain whether foreclosures have had a
positive (or negative) effect on the spatial distribution of HCV households. Previous HCV research has shown that
the majority of HCV households after relocation have difficulty in maintaining their residency even under normal
circumstances. However, little is known about how these results may change given the major housing market
shock.
As such, the paper employs both descriptive and quantitative analysis to answer the following three questions:
(1) After a period of high foreclosures, is the spatial distribution of HCV households more dispersed and less
concentrated in high poverty area than prior to the surge in foreclosures?; (2) Does higher levels of foreclosures
increase the number of HCV households in a neighborhood?; (3) Do foreclosures in lower-income neighborhood
result in more HCV households than in higher-income neighborhood? While this research is on-going,

preliminary review of the data suggests there is considerable correlation between foreclosures and the spatial
distribution of HCV households.
References
 DiPasquale, Denise (2011), “Rental Housing: Current Market Conditions and the Role of Federal Policy,”
Cityscape: A Journal of Policy Development and Research, 13(2): 57-70.
 Immergluck, Dan & Jonathan Law (2013), "Speculating in crisis: the intrametropolitan geography of
investing in foreclosed homes in Atlanta," Urban Geography, 2013 (accessible online).
 Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University (2013), "The State of the Nation's Housing 2012,"
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University.
 Winnick, Louis (1995), “The Triumph of Housing Allowance program: How a Fundamental Policy Conflict
Was Resolved,” Cityscape: A Journal of Policy Development and Research, 1(3): 95-121.

Abstract Index #: 209
THREE REINFORCING CYCLES THAT AMPLIFY THE RISE (AND FALL?) OF MILLENNIAL GENERATION  impact IN
CITIES
Abstract System ID#: 200
Pre-organized Session: Broad Scale  impact of Millennials in the City
MYERS, Dowell [University of Southern California] dowell@usc.edu
The emergence of the Millennial generation into adulthood is a major force potentially reshaping city.
Longstanding trends are being reversed, at least temporarily. Population is growing faster in some city than
their suburbs, young adults are living more densely in inner city districts, and the white population is growing
again in city where it has declined for decades. The question is how permanent are these trends: do Millennial
impacts foretell the future of city or is it all a temporary phase?
The challenge for answering this question is that three cycles now coincide and reinforce, creating much
confusion. Those are the housing lifecycle, the rise and fall of births some 20-30 years earlier, and a business
cycle of boom-bust-recovery like none other, namely the Great Recession.
The normal housing lifecycle of young people is to launch into independent living in their 20s, often with
roommates in apartments in neighborhood close to universities, entertainment, office employment, and transit.
That is followed by progression to independent households, usually with partners, and by early 30s there is often
passage into homeownership located in more outlying districts, and later in school districts attractive to families
with children. The Millennials are now positioned in the early stages of this housing lifecycle, and city are
overflowing with a resurgence of 20-somethings.
But these Millennials actually are not all the same age. A second cycle is the rise and fall of births that form
cohorts. The baby boom generation is the most famous example, beginning in 1946 and ending in 1964 when
births plunged. What followed was a baby bust generation, known as Generation X. From a low point in 1975,
births then climbed rapidly to a new peak in 1990, some 32% more numerous than before, after which births
ceased their increase and declined 6% in five years. Millennials, born 1980 to 2000, straddle this rise and fall of
births, creating a powerful wave of new adults reaching age 25, and peaking now in 2015. The subsequent
deceleration will undermine young demand where it had been growing (Myers and Pitkin 2009). Should there be
a question about immigrants, the post 2000 slowdown in immigration has prevented that factor from making up
for the native born downturn the way it did in the 1990s.
These two cycles interact with a third cycle, the Great Recession and the slow recovery in both employment and
housing construction, which reduced opportunities in the years when Millennials’ surged into adulthood. That led
to slowing of their entry into the labor market, household formation, and other adult roles (Furman 2014). All
forms of mobility slowed during the recession, and lingering effects hold back slightly older adults as well. With
recovery, how much pent-up demand will be released, and in what directions?

This paper makes use of the American Community Survey and comparisons to longer historical patterns. Effects
of the three cycles are carefully documented, and scenarios of future change are simulated. Much is still
unknown about the volume of future housing opportunity and the degree to which Millennials have absorbed
lasting preferences from their experiences in urban living. Explicit treatment of the three reinforcing cycles helps
guide interpretations and may direct future research.
References
 Myers, D. and J. Pitkin (2009) “Demographic Forces and Turning Points in the American City, 1950 to
2040.” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences 626(1):91–111.
 Furman, J. (2014) “America’s Millennials in the Recovery,” Council of Economic Advisers, Washington,
D.C.
 Alonso, W. (1980) The Population Factor in Urban Structure. In The prospective city, ed. Arthur P.
Solomon, 32-51. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
 Taylor, P. (2014) The Next America: Boomers, Millennials, and the Coming Generational Showdown.
New York: Public Affairs.
 Roberts, S. (2014) “Population Growth in New York City is Reversing Decades-old Trend, Estimates Show.
New York Times, March 27.

Abstract Index #: 210
SUSTAINABLE OR INCLUSIVE? THE TENSION BETWEEN HUD'S FAIR HOUSING AND SUSTAINABLE comminuty
PROGRAMS
Abstract System ID#: 203
Individual Paper
LIENKE, Jack [NYU Institute for Policy Integrity] lienkej@exchange.law.nyu.edu
STEIL, Justin [Columbia University] justinsteil@hotmail.com, presenting author
ELLEN, Ingrid [New York University] ingrid.ellen@nyu.edu, primary author
The proposed federal rules implementing the Fair Housing Act’s requirement that recipients of federal funding
affirmatively further fair housing have generated extensive debate over the impact that they are projected to
have on local governments and on the nation’s segregated housing patterns. Comparatively less attention has
been focused on how these rules interact with another federal housing priority—environmental sustainability.
To what extent does a focus on environment impact in  land_use policy and the siting of affordable housing
(developing affordable units in dense, public transportation accessible locations) conflict with the proposed fair
housing regulations by reinforcing existing patterns of racial and economic segregation? Using neighborhood
level Census data to analyze four city (Cleveland, New York, Phoenix, and Seattle) representing four different
regions, we create an index of walkability and transit access and an index of opportunity (comprised of measures
of relative school proficiency, crime rates, and job access). We then measure the extent to which residents of
different racial or ethnic backgrounds, income levels, and status as HUD-assisted tenants or voucher recipients
are distributed equally across neighborhood offering different levels of opportunity and transit accessibility. The
findings indicate that most neighborhood are either walkable/transit accessible or provide access to
opportunity, but not both. However, a significant share of tracts in each city score above metro-area medians for
both measures: approximately 11 percent in New York, 18 percent in Seattle, 15 percent in Cleveland, and 10
percent in Phoenix. We find that HUD-subsidized housing, both project- and voucher-funded housing, is
disproportionately located in walkable/transit-accessible neighborhood that provide poor access to opportunity.
We conclude by exploring ways the proposed regulations can accommodate an environment focus without
undermining its fair housing mandate.

Abstract Index #: 211
DOES PRESERVATION ACCELERATE NEIGHBORHOOD CHANGE? EXAMINING THE IMPACT OF HISTORIC
PRESERVATION IN NEW YORK CITY

Abstract System ID#: 206
Individual Paper
ELLEN, Ingrid [New York University] ingrid.ellen@nyu.edu, presenting author, primary author
MCCABE, Brian [Georgetown University] mccabeb@georgetown.edu
What accounts for the demographic differences between historic districts and their surrounding comminuty?
Why are residents in historic districts more likely to own their own homes and hold a college degree, and less
likely to live below the poverty line? On the one hand, historic designation could speed the process of
neighborhood change by making comminuty more desirable to higher-income, college-educated residents and
less affordable to low-income households. On the other hand, the composition of a neighborhood may change
before the neighborhood is designated, and the demographic transformation may generate increased pressure to
designate a historic district. Despite widespread interest in preserving historic comminuty, there has been
remarkably little research on the demographic  impact of historic preservation. Instead, most research focuses
on the property value  impact from historic designation, typically identifying a positive effect on residential
property values (Been et al. 2014; Noonan & Krupka, 2011). Surprisingly, we know remarkably little about
whether and how historic preservation affects the racial composition and socioeconomic status of a
neighborhood. Recognizing this lacuna in studies of historic preservation, Ryberg-Webster and Kinahan (2014)
identify “a glaring need for empirical research specifying preservation’s relationship to displacement and
affordability.”
In this paper, we ask whether the designation of historic districts contributes to changes in the racial composition
and socioeconomic status in New York City neighborhood. In an attempt to study mechanisms for population
change, we also investigate changes in the housing market conditions in a neighborhood. Does the designation of
a historic district lead to rising rents or a growing proportion of homeowners in a community?
Bringing together data on historic districts with a panel of census tract-level economic and demographic data, we
estimate a difference-in-difference regression accounting for prior trends in neighborhood. We find little
evidence of changes in the racial composition of a neighborhood after the designation of a historic district, but
find that designation leads to a significant change in the socioeconomic status in neighborhood.
Our paper offers new empirical evidence on the way historic preservation affects the social and economic
composition of neighborhood. Designations attract high-income, college-educated residents into the
community, potentially helping to revitalize neighborhood and encourage further development (Listoken,
Listoken and Lahr, 1998). However, our results also suggest that historic designation risks making neighborhood
less accessible to lower income residents, as critics of preservation like David Smith have contended (Smith
1998).
References
 Been, V., Ellen, I. G., Gedal, M., Glaeser, E., & McCabe, B. J. (2014). Preserving History or Hindering
Growth? The Heterogeneous Effects of Historic Districts on Local Housing Markets in New York City
(Working Paper No. 20446). National Bureau of Economic Research.
 Ryberg-Webster, S., & Kinahan, K. L. (2014). Historic Preservation and Urban Revitalization in the
Twenty-first Century. Journal of Planning Literature, 29(2), 119–139.
 Noonan, D. S., & Krupka, D. J. (2011). Making—or Picking—Winners: Evidence of Internal and External
Price Effects in Historic Preservation policy. Real Estate Economics, 39(2), 379–407.
 Smith, N. (1998). Comment on David Listokin, Barbara Listokin, and Michael Lahr’s “The contributions of
historic preservation to housing and economic development”: Historic preservation in a neoliberal age.
Housing Policy Debate, 9(3), 479–485.
 Listokin, D., Listokin, B., & Lahr, M. (1998). The contributions of historic preservation to housing and
economic development. Housing Policy Debate, 9(3), 431–478.

Abstract Index #: 212
MILLENNIALS IN THE CITY? YOUNG ADULTS' LONG-TERM LOCATION AND HOUSING PREFERENCES

Abstract System ID#: 208
Pre-organized Session: Millennials in the City: Trends and Forecasts
MOOS, Markus [University of Waterloo] mmoos@uwaterloo.ca
The concept of youthification has been advanced to explain the growing concentration of young adults into
higher density neighbourhoods with lower automobile use, particularly in the inner city of major metropolitan
areas in the US and Canada. This has raised questions as to whether we can expect young adults to remain in
cities and higher density neighbourhoods over time. Sustainability advocates have celebrated this trend as a sign
of the success of Smart Growth and other planning policy aiming to curb sprawl. However, critics have argued
that this trend is a temporary phenomenon, for instance due to increases in educational attainment that prolong
the young adult lifestyle and childbearing.
The objective of this paper is to shed new light on the question of whether Millennials will remain a generation of
urban dwellers. While there are several approaches to try and understand future housing preferences, this paper
draws on emerging theories and empirical evidence that demonstrate that our long-term housing and location
preferences are shaped, in part, by the type of residential environment we grew up in.
The paper will report on unique survey results of 400 people aged 18 to 40 in the US and Canada. Respondents
were asked several questions regarding their demography, current housing, location and transportation patterns,
and their preferences regarding the housing type (single-family home versus apartment), density and location
(urban, suburban or rural) they wish to end up living in once they get older. Statistical analysis of young adults,
under 30, will reveal whether there is a relationship between young adults’ past experiences and their future
preferences. Examination of those over 30 provides direct empirical evidence on whether young adults’
preferences as they get older are linked to their past experiences. Variations of these trends by demographic and
metropolitan area will be explored.
The paper will reveal important and novel insight into the characteristics of emerging housing trends, and it will
add much needed empirical evidence to the debate on whether Millennials will remain in city and denser
neighbourhoods over time. The results have important implications for housing demand forecasts and planning
policies that shape housing supply. Can we expect a surge in demand for suburban single-family homes once
Millennials age and some start to have children? Or will demand for higher density living continue? And how do
these trends vary for young adults with different demographic characteristics living in different kinds of city?
References
 Blaauboer, M. (2011). The impact of childhood experiences and family members outside the household
on residential environment choices. Urban Studies, 48, 1635-1650.
 Feijten, P. et al. (2008). Residential experiences and residential environment choices over the life-course.
Urban Studies, 45, 141-162.
 Moos, M. (2014). Generationed Space: Societal restructuring and young adults’ changing residential
location patterns. The Canadian Geographer, 58, 11-33.
 Skaburskis, A. (2006). New Urbanism and Sprawl: A Toronto Case Study. Journal of Planning Education
and Research, 25, 233-248.
 Van Diepen, A. and Mustard, S. (2009). Lifestyles and the city. Connecting daily life to urbanity. Journal
of Housing and the Built Environment, 24, 331-345.

Abstract Index #: 213
IS THE REAL ESTATE INDUSTRY CEMENTING MILLENNIALS' RESIDENCE IN CENTRAL city? INSIGHTS FROM
PHOENIX AND HOUSTON DURING THE 2000S AND 2010S
Abstract System ID#: 214
Pre-organized Session: Millennials in the City: Trends and Forecasts
PFEIFFER, Deirdre [Arizona State University] dap624@gmail.com

There is growing evidence that Millennials are living differently than previous generations. Instead of
transitioning from adolescence to adulthood, Millennials linger in the stage of emerging adulthood, which is
defined by having new experiences, moving to new places, and meeting new people (Arnett 2004). They are less
likely to be married and more likely to be living alone or with their parents (Fry 2014). They express interest in
being renters in walkable central city neighborhood, although homeownership is still a part of their American
Dream (Searcey 2014; Leinberger 2011; Kolko 2012). A theory is that these differences will transform urban
housing markets by increasing demand for dense, rental housing in amenity-rich comminuty in the urban core
and spurring innovative development projects (Leinberger 2011).
This research paper uses a multiple case study, mixed-method approach to describe the role that the real estate
industry is playing in “cementing” Millennials’ residence in central city during the 2000s and 2010s. It focuses on
dynamics in Phoenix and Houston—young and sprawling Sunbelt city with historically weak urban cores that
had divergent experiences during the recent Great Recession and foreclosure crisis. The first part of the paper
relies on Public Use Microdata area (PUMAs) information to track changes in the residential location of
Millennials relative to the location of new housing construction completed in 2000, 2006, 2010, and 2013. Data
on PUMAs’ built environment, demographic, and socioeconomic characteristics reveals how the characteristics of
Millennials’ comminuty are changing over time. In the second part of the paper, I construct a list of real estate
developers that completed projects (multifamily or single-family subdivisions) in each city from 2007 to 2013
using informal interviews with planners, permitting data, industry reports, and other secondary sources. I
conduct interviews with a sample of developers explicitly and not explicitly targeting the Millennial market and
report how their motivations, processes, and products differ, if at all. Information obtained through interviews
with planners overseeing the development review and permitting process in each region provide a broader
perspective on differences among these groups of developers and their products. Finally, I triangulate the
quantitative and qualitative data to draw conclusions about 1) how the real estate industry is affecting where and
how Millennials live and 2) how these dynamics are reshaping urban housing markets, if at all.
References
 Arnett, Jeffrey Jensen. 2004. Emerging Adulthood: The Winding Road from the Late Teens through the
Twenties. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
 Fry, Richard. 2014. A Record 21.6 Million in 2012: A Rising Share of Young Adults Live in Their Parents’
Home. Washington, D.C.: Pew Research Center.
 Kolko, Jed. 2012. “’Renter Nation’ Just A Myth: 93% of Millennial Renters Plan To Buy A Home
Someday.” Forbes December 13. Retrieved from:
http://www.forbes.com/sites/trulia/2012/12/13/renter-nation-just-a-myth-93-of-millennial-rentersplan-to-buy-a-home-someday/.
 Leinberger, Christopher B. 2011. “Death of the Fringe Suburb.” New York Times November 25. Retrieved
from: www.nytimes.com/2011/11/26/opinion/the-death-of-the-fringe-suburb.html.
 Searcey, Dionne. 2014. “No Picket Fence: Younger Adults Opting to Rent.” New York Times October 22.
Retrieved from: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/23/business/no-picket-fence-younger-adults-optingto-rent.html?_r=0.

Abstract Index #: 214
MEASURING AND RESPONDING TO DISPLACEMENT IN SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA'S TRANSIT neighborhood
Abstract System ID#: 222
Pre-organized Session: Disadvantaged and Displaced in California
PECH, Chhandara [UCLA] chan.pech@gmail.com, presenting author
LOUKAITOUSIDERIS, Anastasia [UCLA] sideris@ucla.edu, primary author
ONG, Paul [UCLA] pmong@ucla.edu
Central theme and research questions: As more lines and stations are added to Southern California’s transit
network, low-income comminuty are increasingly concerned about how these investments will affect them.

While a flourishing literature exists on the topic of transit-oriented development, surprisingly little is known
about 1) if and how transit investment and related new development around transit stations bring gentrification
and displacement in transit neighborhood; 2) if some neighborhood are more susceptible than others; 3) which
social and physical characteristics of transit neighborhood play a role in encouraging residential and/or
commercial gentrification and displacement; and 4) what planners and policy makers can do to protect transit
neighborhoods from displacement. The study will address these questions within the context of Los Angeles
County.
Methodology: The study incorporates both quantitative and qualitative research methodologies. During the first
phase of the research we used census data and detailed parcel data that cover a 25-year period to develop a
tract- and parcel-level database for all station-neighborhoods in Southern California in order to model past and
current patterns of neighborhood change, including overall demographic change and displacement around transit
stations. We also used the most recent 5-year American Community Survey (ACS) to develop a census tract-based
time series with data on housing and demographic characteristics for area within a half-mile radius of transit
stations. A regression model uses the in-moves into a station neighborhood as its dependent variable and a
number of neighborhood socio-demographic, economic, and  land_use characteristics as independent variables.
During the second phase, we chose six case studies of different station neighborhood typologies and gathered
detailed information about their physical and social characteristics through urban form observation, and surveys
and interviews with neighborhood stakeholders. The purpose of this qualitative research is to better understand
the changes that each of the case study neighborhood has sustained in the last decade, and the forces behind
them. This mixed methods approach will help us better understand the dynamics of gentrification and
displacement in transit neighborhood, develop a set of tools to examine the likely outcomes around TODs, and
lead to the identification of strategies to minimize displacement in vulnerable transit neighborhood.
Relevance of Work to Planning: This work is particularly relevant for professional planners who are becoming
increasingly aware that transit neighborhood may be susceptible to gentrification and/or displacement because
the proximity of a neighborhood to transit may increase its desirability and lead to price escalation in land values,
housing prices, and rents. Since there is little academic research on displacement around TODs, this work should
also be of interest to planners in academia.
References
 Chapple, K. (2009). Mapping Susceptibility to Gentrification: The Early Warning Toolkit. UC Berkley:
Center for Community Innovation.
 Kahn, M. (2007). “Gentrification Trends in New Transit-Oriented comminuty: Evidence from 14 city
that Expanded and Built Rail Transit system. Real Estate Economics. 35(2): 155-182.
 Kilpatrick, J.A., Throupe, R.I., Carruthers, J.I., and Krause, A. (2007). “The Impact of transit Corridors on
Residential Property Values. Journal of real Estate Research. 29(3): 303-320.
 Northeastern University (2010). Maintaining Diversity in America’s transit-Rich neighborhood. Dukakis
Center for Urban and Regional Policy.

Abstract Index #: 215
UNDERSTANDING THE ROLE OF SOCIAL SUPPORTS IN ENDING VETERAN HOMELESSNESS
Abstract System ID#: 236
Individual Paper
GLASMEIER, Amy [MIT] amyglas@mit.edu, presenting author, primary author
CHINCHILLA, Melissa [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] myc@mit.edu
In the 1960s Vietnam Veterans returning from war faced many unique challenges. They were the first to suffer
from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and experience homelessness at disproportionately high rates. Today,
Veterans continue to be overrepresented among the homeless population as they are more likely to experience
financial hardships linked to unemployment, mental health disorders, and substance abuse issues (Rosenheck
1994).

When compared to previous Veterans, those currently returning from Iraq and Afghanistan are experiencing even
greater vulnerabilities to homelessness. Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF) and Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF)
returnees have exponentially high rates of PTSD, traumatic brain injury, and challenges with reintegration.
Whereas it took 9 to 12 years for the circumstances of Vietnam Veterans to deteriorate to the point of
homelessness, OIF/OEF Veterans are seeking housing services just months after returning from war (Fairweather
2006). These servicemen and women are at notable risk of becoming homeless and present new challenges to
our system.
Postmilitary social isolation, psychiatric disorder, and substance abuse have strong direct effects on
homelessness (Rosenbeck & Fontana 1994). While Veterans require various supports, individuals most vulnerable
to homelessness have limited social resources. Research suggests that social isolation can have an even stronger
effect on homelessness than psychiatric disorder (Rosenbeck & Fontana 1994; Grigsby et al. 1990). The period
following military discharge is crucial as personnel leave their combat units to readjust to civilian life. If we are to
properly serve the needs of Veterans and prevent homelessness among this population, we must understand
available resources and inefficiencies in our delivery system.
Past experience tells us that Veterans will need adjustment support to reintegrate into their comminuty. Back in
the 1970s the federal government enacted the Veterans’ Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974, increasing
benefits available under the 1966 Bill, and Public Law 96-22 which founded Vet Centers to assist with
readjustment problems. And yet, even with these efforts, homelessness in the Vietnam era population remains
high requiring a recommitment of the U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs to ending Veteran homelessness by the
end of 2015.
This paper interrogates the existing system of social service provision to understand the efficacy of the safety-net
for recently discharged military personnel. Multiple services are put in place at the federal level and local actors
are charged with service delivery, to what extent are these program and services sensitive to the lived
experience of active duty members? The military functions in a cohesive group setting reminiscent of a family.
This system is regimented and exists in a care-oriented environment. Discharge requires a disaffiliation from the
military and reintegration into society. As other studies note, social supports are a protective factor against
homelessness. Housing stability may be impacted by a Veteran’s ability to replicate social bond formation outside
of the military structure. Therefore, we are interested in whether or not Veteran program are designed with this
trajectory in mind; do support system assist with the reproduction of community and social supports?
We will use a multi-site case study investigating Veteran services in Boston, Massachusetts and Los Angeles,
California. Boston was chosen due to its accessibility and Los Angeles was chosen as a comparison because it has
the largest homeless Veteran population in the country. Our research will consist of (1) creating an inventory of
Veteran services by analyzing Federal funding streams and implementation at the local level, (2) analyzing service
providers’ mission statements to assess whether or not they incorporate social supports into their model, (3)
interviewing program officials and service providers, and (4) reviewing program evaluation efforts examining
Veteran services to determine if increasing social supports yields differing outcomes for housing stability and/or
homeless prevention.
References
 Edens, Ellen L., Wes Kasprow, Jack Tsai, and Robert A. Rosenheck. "Association of substance use and VA
service‐connected disability benefits with risk of homelessness among veterans." The American Journal
on Addictions20, no. 5 (2011): 412-419.
 Rosenbeck, R., and Alan Fontana. "A model of homelessness among male veterans of the Vietnam War
generation." American Journal of Psychiatry 151 (1994): 421-421.
 Grigsby, Charles, Donald Baumann, Steven E. Gregorich, and Cynthia Roberts‐Gray. "Disaffiliation to
entrenchment: A model for understanding homelessness." Journal of Social Issues 46, no. 4 (1990): 141156.



Fairweather, A. (2006, December 7). Risk and protective factors for homelessness among OIF/OEF
veterans. Retrieved May 11, 2009, from http://www. nchv.org/docs/Microsoft%20Word%20-%20
Risk%20and%20Protective%20Factors%20for%20 Homelessness%20among%20OIF%20Veterans.pdf

Abstract Index #: 216
WHY AFFORDABLE HOME DESIGN MATTERS
Abstract System ID#: 250
Individual Paper
PRICE, Cody [The Ohio State University] price.644@osu.edu
The design of affordable housing can influence people’s willingness to allow affordable housing near them.
Research in design and neighborhood opposition demonstrates that people tend to associate affordable housing
as unattractive and poorly maintained (Tighe 2010). The present study tests whether residents are more willing
to allow affordable housing near them if it is designed to look indistinguishable from market-rate housing.
Two hundred and nineteen people (99 men, and 120 women) from 34 states and Canada participated in an online survey recruited through a snowball sample via social media. Most participants reported that they were
Caucasian, a homeowner, married, well educated, with family incomes greater than $50,000. The survey
measured the participant’s willingness to allow affordable housing near them using a social distance scale. The
survey also asked participants to choose which home they believed to be affordable between three market-rate
homes and one affordable home. Half of the respondents completed the social distance scale as a pre-test,
whereas everyone completed the social distance scale as a post-test. The analysis found that the homeowners
and higher-income individuals were less willing to have affordable housing near them than the renters and lowerincome individuals. The analysis also found that people were more willing to allow affordable housing near them
after taking the survey. Perhaps, under the right circumstances, exposure to a correct definition of affordable
housing or exposure to well-designed units (indistinguishable from market-rate housing) can increase people’s
willingness to allow affordable housing near them. Developers, affordable housing agencies, and planners could
use such information to decrease the stigma associated with affordable housing by educating the community on
who lives in affordable housing, by using single-family affordable housing that looks like market-rate housing, and
by testing neighbor responses afterwards to refine future designs.
References
 Tighe, J. Rosie. 2010. Public opinion and affordable housing: A review of the literature. Journal of
Planning Literature 25(1) 3-17.

Abstract Index #: 217
BUILDING INCLUSIVE neighborhood THROUGH TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT: LINKING EQUITABLE
POLICIES, PLANS, AND OUTCOMES
Abstract System ID#: 258
Individual Paper
BAKER, Dwayne [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] dbaker7@illinois.edu
Transit Oriented Developments (TODs) are expected to improve a multitude of urban and regional conditions,
some of which include: (a) economic opportunities, (b) regional and transit access, and (c)  land_use, all of which,
in short, provide livable neighborhood (Bernick & Cervero, 1997). Despite such expected improvements, TODs,
especially surrounding light rail transit (LRT), may unfortunately fall short of their initial promises by producing
urban spaces only benefiting a select few. Previous studies highlight how TOD and LRT may induce gentrification
and displace residents (Kahn, 2007; Clagett, 2014); yet, unaffordable housing or displacement related issues due
to TOD’s potential gentrification effect deserve increased attention from researchers (Feinstein and Allen, 2011).

I therefore analyze how TODs may impact a neighborhood’s social and built environment by identifying how
residents and/or spaces can be overlooked in TOD-related policy and planning activities. I aim to emphasize
how policy and their related activities can influence the development of accessible urban space and inclusive
neighborhoods. Inclusive neighborhood are those that provide a mix of amenities, services, and housing that,
importantly, are accessible to all regional residents. Accessible reflects the ability of regional residents to reach
and attain goods, services, activities, transit, and housing without hindrance due to physical, social, or policy
related barriers. I therefore ask: How can TOD related policy and their associated planning activities help or
hinder the development of inclusive neighborhood?
To answer this question, I use a mixed-method approach concentrating on a case study analysis of St. Louis's
Delmar Loop (DL) light rail TOD site. I particularly use semi-structured interviews with planners in city, regional,
and transit agencies active in the DL TOD. TOD implementation, however, may involve a variety of other actors or
stakeholders. Accordingly, I also use interviews with business owners, community groups, and developers. I
additionally utilize direct observations of the DL site. The observations provide intricate details unable to be
ascertained from the interviews, documents, and quantitative analyses. For instance, I observed uneven
development on different sides of the station: the east side contains uneven sidewalks and empty lots; while the
west side holds wide, clear sidewalks and an abundance of businesses.
Initial results indicate that a lack of coordinated planning efforts have occurred within the Delmar Loop TOD site.
The lack of coordination largely stems from an abundance of DL stakeholders with different goals. The various
stakeholders agree on the basic tenants of TODs (i.e. mixed use developments, high walkability, and multi-modal
transit). However, the activities undertaken; interpretation of policy; and the role of light rail differ greatly
depending on stakeholder interest(s). Varying interpretations and activities based on policy (i.e. Title VI or
ISTEA) relating to transit and community development may potentially displace the area’s current and future
residents, as planning and development in the DL is currently ongoing. Similarly, not focusing on light rail may not
allow all St. Louis residents access to DL amenities. Overall, this lack of coordination and disperse activities has
resulted in uneven development on different sides of the DL light rail station, different levels of funding for
different spaces, and, in turn, somewhat of an exclusive, inaccessible neighborhood.
Research findings will contribute understanding to transit and community development by highlighting: (a)
whether and how TOD policy and activities are designed to include or, critically, exclude specific neighborhood
and residents; and (b) best practices for coordinating light rail planning activities with community planning.
Finally, this research demonstrates how residents in urban spaces may be socially and economically affected by
planning decisions, which specifically addresses calls for planning scholars to more deliberately consider their
research’s impact on social justice issues.
References
 Bernick, M. & Cervero, R. (1997). Transit Villages in the 21st Century. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
 Clagett, M. T. (2014). If it’s not mixed-income, it won’t be transit-oriented: Ensuring our future
developments are equitable & promote transit. Transportation Law Journal, 41(1), 1-32.
 Kahn, M. E. (2007). Gentrification trends in new transit-oriented comminuty: Evidence from 14 city
that expanded and built rail transit system. Real Estate Economics, 35(2), 155-182.
 Feinstein, B. D. & Allen, A. (2014). Community benefits agreements with transit agencies: Neighborhood
change along Boston’s rail lines and a legal strategy for addressing gentrification. Transportation Law
Journal, 38(85), 85-113.

Abstract Index #: 218
EXAMINING THE LOCAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OF THE HOUSING PROVIDENT FUND PROGRAM IN CHINA, A
CASE STUDY OF BEIJING AND SHANGHAI
Abstract System ID#: 255
Individual Paper
DENG, Lan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] landeng@umich.edu

This proposed paper examines the local management practices of China’s Housing Provident Fund (HPF) program.
HPF is one of the most important housing program in China (Deng et al. 2011). Essentially a compulsory housing
saving plan, the Chinese HPF program requires both employers and employees contribute a certain percentage of
the employees’ salaries to the employees’ individual HPF accounts. In return, employees can withdraw their HPF
savings and get subsidized HPF loans for qualified housing expenses such as home purchases and renovation. By
2012, the program has collected 5 trillion RMB savings, with the number of active contributors up to 102 million,
and an outstanding HPF loan balance of 1.7 trillion RMB (Chen and Deng 2014).
Like other housing program in China, HPF has a decentralized management structure. The central government
sets up the principles and rules, while the management of HPF fund falls entirely on local HPF centers, who are
responsible for collecting and distributing HPF fund within their jurisdictions. Nationwide, there are 409 HPF
centers in 2011. Because of this structure, there is considerable flexibility in local HPF management. Local HPF
administrations can adjust the contribution rate as well as the salary basis used to calculate the contribution.
They also have discretion over the issuance of HPF loans. According to Chen (2009), the strong local government
involvement is what distinguishes HPF lending from the commercial mortgage lending. However, despite
occasional media reporting, very few studies have examined the local HPF management practices. We do not
know to what extent the HPF has become a local housing policy tool and what role it has played in addressing
local housing needs. Nor do we know whether the local variations in HPF management have made a difference in
program outcome.
This paper will attempt to fill this gap by examining the HPF management in China’s two most important city,
Beijing and Shanghai. Specifically, it will investigate the following research questions:
1.

How has the HPF management differed between Beijing and Shanghai? What factors have accounted for
their differences?

2.

What constraints or opportunities have HPF centers encountered in managing the HPF program?

3.

How much flexibility do HPF centers have in tailoring HPF management to their local conditions?

To answer these questions, I propose a mix of quantitative and qualitative methods, including statistical analysis
of data on the collection and uses of HPF fund and their relationship with local housing and economic
environment, archival searches of government documents, local media reports, and academic publications, and
last but not the least, field research and interviews of government officials involved in the HPF management.
Findings from this project will have important implications for the future reform of the HPF program.
References
 Chen, J., 2009. The History of China’s Housing Provident Fund and Direction for Future Reform. Journal
of Party and Administrative Officials (in Chinese), (4), pp.27–29.
 Chen, J., Deng, L. 2014. Financing Affordable Housing through Compulsory Saving: the Two-decade
Experience of Housing Provident Fund in China. Housing Studies doi: 10.1080/02673037.2014.923088.
 Deng, L., Shen, Q. & Wang, L., 2011. The Emerging Housing Policy Framework in China. Journal of
Planning Literature, 26(2), pp.168–183.

Abstract Index #: 219
THE EVOLUTION OF THE FORECLOSURE CRISIS IN comminuty OF COLOR
Abstract System ID#: 259
Individual Paper
REID, Carolina [University of California, Berkeley] c_reid@berkeley.edu

Despite extensive research on the foreclosure crisis, we know relatively little about the distribution and drivers of
foreclosure over time, especially within comminuty of color. Due to data limitations, studies on delinquencies
and foreclosures have tended to focus on a limited geographic area or on a single point in time. However, the
evolution of subprime lending practices coupled with regional differences in house price dynamics means that
some borrowers and neighborhood experienced foreclosures earlier than others, and for different reasons. This
temporal dimension is missing in contemporary analyses of the foreclosure crisis, but is of critical importance
when we consider the degree to which comminuty benefited from federal program designed to prevent
foreclosures or mitigate their negative  impact on neighborhood.
In this paper, I examine the temporal dynamics of the foreclosure crisis to show how the comminuty affected by
foreclosures changed over time. I present three separate analyses. First, I show the racial and ethnic distribution
of foreclosures over time. Second, I map the changing nature of neighborhood affected by concentrated
foreclosures, showing both local and regional differences in when defaults emerged and peaked. Third, I specify
a multinomial logit model of mortgage default to show how the factors influencing the likelihood of foreclosure
(including race, income, FICO score, loan product features, equity position, and macroeconomic conditions)
changed over the duration of the crisis. These analyses rely on a national dataset that merges foreclosure data
spanning 2006 – 2012 from a large, mortgage servicing database with data on borrower race and income from
the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), as well as data on neighborhood level variables (including zip code
level house price data and socio-economic and demographic variables from the U.S. Census). These merged data
provide a unique opportunity to examine the racial and ethnic dimensions of the foreclosure crisis at multiple
geographic scales and over time.
The analysis shows the ways in which delinquencies and defaults among African American and Latino borrowers
who received subprime and risky loan products emerged well before the broader housing market collapse and
the policy response. Indeed, the federal response to the foreclosure crisis has been characterized as “too little,
too late, and too timid” (Immergluck 2013); in this paper, I argue that “too late” had a disproportionate impact
on borrowers of color, because they failed to effectively address the underlying causes and  impact of predatory
lending practices. Instead, the “policy window” to respond opened only when the crisis evolved into broader
concerns over homeowner equity and widespread unemployment (2003). By analyzing the evolution of
foreclosures and the federal response through a lens that explicitly considers the racial and ethnic dimensions of
the crisis, I hope to contribute to a richer understanding of the repercussions of the crisis for borrowers and
neighborhoods of color as well as to inform contemporary policy debates bearing on access to credit and lending
for lower-income and minority households (Immergluck 2009).
References
 Immergluck, Dan (2009). “The Foreclosure Crisis, Foreclosed Properties, and Federal Policy: Some
Implications for Housing and Community Development Planning,” Journal of the American Planning
Association 75(4): 406-423.
 Immergluck, Dan (2013). “Too Little, Too Late, and Too Timid: The Federal Response to the Foreclosure
Crisis at the Five-Year Mark.” Housing Policy Debate 23, no. 1 (January 1, 2013): 199–232.
 Kingdon, John. (2003) Agendas, Alternatives and Public Policy, 2nd ed. New York: Addison-Wesley.

Abstract Index #: 220
HERITAGE AMID AN URBAN CRISIS: A CASE STUDY OF CLEVELAND, OHIO'S SLAVIC VILLAGE NEIGHBORHOOD
Abstract System ID#: 262
Pre-organized Session: Legacy city: The Quest for Revitalization
RYBERG-WEBSTER, Stephanie [Cleveland State University] s.ryberg@csuohio.edu, presenting author, primary
author
CALDWELL, Amelia [Cleveland State University] a.s.caldwell@csuohio.edu
In recent years, Cleveland’s Slavic Village neighborhood garnered national attention as the early epicenter of the
foreclosure crisis. Slavic Village faces an uncertain future, as housing values plummeted, vacancy and

abandonment escalated, and property deterioration and vandalism ran rampant. In response, the dominant
policy discourse emphasizes demolition to address foreclosure-related vacancies and, more generally, to reduce
an oversupply of housing plaguing neighborhood in so-called “legacy city.” Slavic Village’s built environment,
though, is the tangible manifestation of the community’s rich immigrant and working-class heritage, with one
local historic district, two National Register historic districts, a number of individual local and/or national
landmark buildings, and additional historic resources that lack any current local or national designation.
The overarching research question guiding this study is: How do legacy city neighborhood stabilization efforts
incorporate heritage and historic preservation? I use a qualitative case study of Cleveland’s Slavic Village, relying
on key person interviews with the local CDC (Slavic Village Development), the private-sector Slavic Village
Recovery project, and various partners. Other sources include neighborhood plans, organizational documents,
and media. The findings demonstrate broad agreement that the neighborhood has a rich and important heritage
manifested in its people, traditions, institutions, and buildings. At the same time, Slavic Village’s historic fabric is
in peril because traditional preservation regulations, such as local historic districts, and incentives, such as tax
credits and low-interest loans, are insufficient given the scale of devastation and the neighborhood’s current
market and political conditions. There is an emphasis on iconic, architecturally stunning buildings, to the
detriment of Slavic Village’s vast landscape of vernacular housing. Housing rehabilitation efforts often avoid the
existing historic districts due to fear of regulatory burdens. And, political support for creative rehabilitation
financing tied to historic preservation and for designating additional historic resources is nonexistent.
The research demonstrates that community developers may value heritage and historic buildings, but need to
address a multitude of challenges, face political and funding constraints, and have limited preservation expertise.
For historic preservation to play a role in Slavic Village’s revitalization, community developers need more
flexibility, new (or modified) regulatory tools and funding, and improved means of code enforcement. To prevent
a future in which isolated restored landmarks stand amid a sea of disinvestment, disrepair and demolition,
preservationists need to engage in coalition-building and devise approaches that respond to the challenges of
struggling neighborhood across the country.
References
 Carr, J. H., & Servon, L. J. 2008. Vernacular culture and urban economic development: Thinking outside
the (big) box. Journal of the American Planning Association, 75(1), 28-40.
 Krumholz, N., Keating, D., Star, P. D., & Chupp, M. C. 2006. The Long-Term Impact of CDCs on Urban
Neighborhoods: Case Studies of Cleveland’s Broadway-Slavic Village and Tremont neighborhood.
Community Development 37(4): 33-52.
 Mallach, A. 2011. Demolition and preservation in shrinking U.S. industrial city. Building Research &
Information 39(4): 380-394.
 Ryberg-Webster, S., & Kinahan, K. L. 2014. Historic Preservation and Urban Revitalization in the Twentyfirst Century. Journal of Planning Literature, 29(2), 119-139.

Abstract Index #: 221
BUILDING HOPE OR CONCENTRATING POVERTY: HABITAT FOR HUMANITY'S IMPACT ON URBAN
NEIGHBORHOODS
Abstract System ID#: 335
Individual Paper
SORENSEN, Janni [UNC-Charlotte] jsorens2@uncc.edu, presenting author, primary author
GAMEZ, Jose [UNC Charlotte] jlgamez@uncc.edu
DELMELLE, Elizabeth [UNC Charlotte] edelmell@uncc.edu
HOWARTH, Thomas [University of North Carolina at Charlotte] thowarth@uncc.edu
BENGLE, Tara [University of North Carolina at Charlotte] tarsmith@uncc.edu
CURRIE, Melissa [University of North Carolina at Charlotte] mcurrie3@uncc.edu

This paper examines the influence Habitat for Humanity (HfH) has had in Charlotte, NC over time and at the scale
of specific neighborhood. The Charlotte chapter of HfH has been one of the most ambitious and prolific in the
U.S. It began building in 1983 and in its first seven years built 100 houses and raised more than $3 million
(Williams, 1990). By 2010, Charlotte HfH had exceeded 1000 families served (HfH Charlotte website, 2015). Our
examination of HfH’s impact on neighborhood stems from a broader reflection on the lack of affordable housing
policy in the Charlotte context. HfH defines its mission as to provide a “decent place to live” by bringing people
together to build “homes, comminuty, and hope” (HfH Charlotte website, 2015). We explore whether HfH
Charlotte is accomplishing this mission and, in the process, uncover details about challenges to reach this mission
of creating “decent place to live” with a narrow focus of the house and with little or no attention given to the
neighborhood surrounding it.
Our research has found that HfH in Charlotte predominantly builds in the lowest income comminuty, and we
highlight issues connected to a model that provides homeownership to low-income families in only the most
persistently disadvantaged poverty landscapes. While there is often an assumption that increased homeowner
occupancy will solve many problems in low-income neighborhood, some studies show that increasing
homeownership may not actually lead to benefits for the homeowner or the neighborhood at large (Shlay, 2006).
We, therefore, question whether the concentration of HfH homes in a neighborhood leads to any substantive
change in socioeconomic conditions. We also question the efficacy of HfH’s model that places low-income
households in neighborhood with high crime, high poverty, and low probability of housing value appreciation. To
explore these issues we examine the trajectory of neighborhood with concentrations of HfH homes using an
adjusted interrupted time-series (AITS) method (Smith, 2007; Kontokosta, 2012; Beck Pooley, 2014) and housing
price data. We compare neighborhood of similar composition both with and without HfH clustering to
determine what effects a concentration of HfH homes has on a neighborhood. Discourse analysis of local media
coverage supports the time series analysis to track neighborhood conditions before and after HfH’s construction
activity. Finally, we explore the experiences of HfH homeowners to add a qualitative layer of understanding pros
and cons of how the HfH model has played out in Charlotte. To address what are essentially qualitative issues
tied to homeownership, we conduct interviews with HfH homeowners to assess their level of satisfaction with
their homes and neighborhood. We address issues of crime, property appreciation, and access to quality
services such as schools for the families who bought into HfH neighborhood. The interviews also explore the
social fabric of neighborhood and the possible divides between homeowners, HfH homeowners, and renters.
Finally, the interviews address how concentration of HfH homes  impact the qualitative sense of place within
neighborhoods. Through this research we offer a critique of HfH’s charity model and suggest that HfH and other
public-private partnerships must pay attention to issues that expand beyond the home and into the
neighborhood so that their work contributes to a future that does not simply reproduce segregated urban
neighborhoods.
References
 Pooley, K. B. (2014). Using Community Development Block Grant dollars to revitalize neighborhood: The
impact of program spending in Philadelphia.Housing Policy Debate, 24(1), 172-191.
 Shlay, A. B. (2006). Low-income homeownership: American dream or delusion?. Urban Studies, 43(3),
511-531.
 Kontokosta, C. (2012). The Price of Victory The Impact of the Olympic Games on Residential Real Estate
Markets. Urban Studies, 49(5), 961-978.
 Smith, R. J. (2007). Real Estate Capitalization By Policy Input In The Cleveland Empowerment Zone: An
Application OF Adjusted Interrupted Time Series Analysis (AITS). Michigan Journal of Public Affairs, 4, 122.
 Williams, R.Y. (1990, November 15). Building 100th low-cost home makes it a habit for humanity.
Charlotte Observer. pp. 1A.

Abstract Index #: 222
THEORIZING THE IDIOSYNCRATIC DYNAMICS OF URBAN DECLINE
Abstract System ID#: 267
Pre-organized Session: Legacy city: The Quest for Revitalization

GALSTER, George [Wayne State University] george.galster@wayne.edu
Why Bother Learning from Declining city? Aren’t they Mirror-Images of Growing city? NO--Because their
dynamic processes are distinctively different from growing city’ in at least four respects:
1. Spatially-Temporally Unpredictable
where & when neighborhood residential & retail abandonment occurs is difficult to predict and, unlike growth
scenario, is little influenced by  land_use planning; abandonment (esp. of larger multifamily buildings) may lead to
rapid & involuntary (and unpredictable) residential turnover that ruptures social ties & erodes collective efficacy
for remaining residents, thus (unpredictably) intensifying their exposure to violence
2. Psychologically Conservative
Conservation of Resources (CORE) theory argues that people fundamentally are driven to obtain, expand and
retain physical, social and psychological resources; but they behave differently when they are trying to protect
themselves from shrinking resources due to
strategically in restoring/growing resources but rather hold on more tightly to the remnants of resources they
have (which ultimately is self-defeating); another reaction to declining resources is scapegoating, since reduced
self-esteem hinder one’s acceptance of personal responsibility
3. Dynamically Nonlinear
neighborhood indicators do not change in a linear fashion on a declining trajectory, instead they are
characterized by thresholds where the degree of residential and commercial disinvestment and flight of non-poor
residents jumps sharply, often in catastrophic fashion; poverty concentrations in turn have their own associated
thresholds of about 15-20% where they are strongly associated with rapidly increasing incidences of social
problems in the neighborhood.
4. Incompletely Irreversible
Downward trajectory different from upward trajectory of urban area due to:
• Technically (water, sewer, electric, transportation infrastructure maintenance & repair costs cannot be
proportionally scaled back if users decline, leading to overcapacity/underutilization problem)
• Financially (pension & health care legacy costs of prior, larger generation of municipal employees cannot
be proportionally scaled back if tax revenues decline; land prices can only decline until zero--cannot be
negative)
• Politically (repeated failures to halt the course of urban decline breed distrust of elected officials and all
those not currently resident in the city, conspiracy theories & identity politics —social capital easy to
erode, tough to rebuild)
References
 Galster, G. 2012. Driving Detroit. U. Penn Press

Abstract Index #: 223
EVALUATING SMART GROWTH POLICY  impact USING LEED-ND CRITERION: A GIS METHODOLOGY
EVALUATING URBAN FORM HISTORICAL TRENDS FROM 1960-2010
Abstract System ID#: 269
Individual Paper
NAJI, Ammar [University of Florida] ammnaji@ufl.edu, presenting author, primary author
ARAFAT, Abdulnaser [University of Florida] naserarafat@dcp.ufl.edu
ZWICK, Paul [university of Florida] pdzwick@ufl.edu
The physical and social characteristics of the places where people live affect their behavior and long-term wellbeing. Consequently, policymakers, planners, and designers are seeking to reach ideal urban form. As one of the

smart growth initiatives, the Leadership in Energy and environment Design for Neighborhood Development
(LEED-ND) rating system promotes compact development with the following goals: to reduce automobile
dependence, increase walkability, allocate new development in infilling lands and brownfields, protect
agriculture lands, and promote street connectivity with higher density and more mixed  land_uses, with better
accessibility and housing jobs proximity. There are an increasing need of quantitative analysis about the urban
form characteristics and consequences. To help meet these needs, we should define a way to measure smart
growth trend in order to track their progress. Unfortunately, the inherent complexity of urban form cannot be
captured by one or two variables.
Therefore, this research intends to measure the impact of the smart growth polices during a particular period of
time, by evaluating the multi-family and single family homes built prior to 2010 based on LEED-ND scores. Using
Hillsborough County, Florida, a framework for integrating the LEED-ND rating system with the geographic
information system (GIS) to rank the built environment at the regional level is introduced.
This study attempts to define and quantify the urban form based on time series data using a parcel level scale of
analysis. By assessing metropolitan growth patterns based on LEED-ND criteria, the methodology is used to
present a highly detailed portrait of urban form pattern changes over time that will enable decision-makers to
evaluate their growth management plans more effectively. By integrating the Fair Housing Equity Assessment
(FHEA) principles to LEED-ND model, future research will address how urban form may be influencing the social
equity and residential location’s accessibility to urban services.
This researchers have demonstrated that LEED-ND criteria can be used to measure and analyses the urban form
changes at parcel level, in addition this study found that Multifamily and single family homes locations prior to
1970 are likelier to have more amenities and it’s located in area in close proximity and high accessibility to urban
center and other servicers. However a minor improvement and shift in home locations can be seen since 2000.
References
 Knaap, G.-J., Song, Y., & Nedovic-Budic, Z. (2007). Measuring patterns of urban development: New
intelligence for the war on sprawl. Local Environment, 12(3), 239–257.
 Garde, A. (2009). Sustainable by Design? Insights From U.S. LEED-ND Pilot Projects. Journal of the
American Planning Association, 75(4).
 Jabareen, R. (2006). Sustainable urban forms: Their typologies, models, and concepts. Journal of
Planning Education and Research, 26(1), 38–52.
 Dieleman, F., & Wegener, M. (2004). Compact City and Urban Sprawl. Built Environment, 30(4), 308–
323.
 Song, Y. (2005). Smart growth and urban development pattern: A comparative study. International
Regional Science Review, 28(2), 239–265.

Abstract Index #: 224
SEARCHING FOR NEIGHBORHOOD OPPORTUNITY: A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER
LOCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN DUVAL COUNTY, FLORIDA AND BEXAR COUNTY, TEXAS
Abstract System ID#: 276
Individual Paper
WANG, Ruoniu [University of Florida] wrnvince@ufl.edu, presenting author, primary author
WALTER, Rebecca [University of Texas at San Antonio] Rebecca.Walter@utsa.edu
As the largest rental subsidy in the nation, the Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) program accommodates lowincome households searching for suitable rental housing and encourages the expansion of opportunity. However,
previous research has shown a shortage of affordable housing in opportunity-rich neighborhood (Pendall, 2000).
In addition, neighborhood that are accessible to public transportation are often located in poverty-stricken, high
crime area (Been et al., 2010). These challenges not only result in voucher holders locating in suboptimal area
but also severely  impact the lease-up rate.

Building upon previous research on evaluating voucher locational outcomes (McClure, 2011; Pendall et al., 2014),
this research develops a neighborhood opportunity assessment framework that includes three key components:
housing supply, accessibility to opportunity, and neighborhood conditions. Each component contains a set of
subcomponents and corresponding variables. This comprehensive framework is used to compare voucher
locational outcomes in two Sunbelt counties: Duval County, Florida and Bexar County, Texas. The primary city in
these counties are Jacksonville and San Antonio, respectively. Both counties are characterized by their lowdensity, suburban-style development, while substantially diverse in racial and ethnic composition, offering a
valuable lens through which to study HCV locational patterns. In this research, three questions are examined: (1)
What are the spatial patterns of neighborhood opportunity in terms of housing supply, accessibility, and
neighborhood conditions in both counties? (2) Is there a relationship between voucher distribution and
neighborhood opportunity? (3) What is the spatial pattern of different voucher demographic subgroups?
The framework largely builds on newly-developed measurements and localized data sources, including pointlevel rental rates collected from real estate listings, land parcel-level estimation of proximity and number of
opportunities that utilize road network distance to improve accuracy, and number of destinations that can be
reached by any location using a transit travel time shed approach. Geographically weighted principal component
analysis is used to create an index for each component. The indices are standardized and analyzed spatially for
the metropolitan area using opportunity identification strategy to determine neighborhood that are affordable,
accessible, and opportunity-rich.
This research intends to advance rental housing policy for very low-income households. Beyond the value this
framework provides for public housing authorities and their clients to succeed in locating qualified housing and
furthering fair housing goals, local governments can use it to assess neighborhood opportunity regionally; a
strategy firmly emphasized by Briggs (2005) for the future of rental housing policy.
References
 Been, V., Cunningham, M., Ellen, I.G., Gordon, A., Parilla, J., Turner, M.A., Whitney, S.V., Yowell, A., &
Zimmerman, K. (2010). Building environmently sustainable comminuty: A framework for inclusivity.
Washington, DC: The Urban Institute What Works Collaborative.
 Briggs, (2005). The geography of opportunity: Race and housing choice in metropolitan America.
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
 McClure, K. (2011). Housing Choice Voucher marketing opportunity index: Analysis of data at the tract
and block group level. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of
Policy Development and Research.
 Pendall, R. (2000). Why voucher and certificate users live in distressed neighborhood. Housing Policy
Debate, 11, 881-910.
 Pendall, R., Hayes, C., George, A., McDade, Z., Dawkins, C., Jeon, J. S., Smart, M., (2014). Driving to
opportunity: Understanding the links among transportation access, residential outcomes, and economic
opportunity for housing voucher recipients. Washington, DC: Urban Institute.

Abstract Index #: 225
THE IMPACT OF CAMPUS FORM ON STUDENTS' SATISFACTION, LEARNING, SAFETY AND TRAVEL MODE
Abstract System ID#: 280
Individual Paper
HAJRASOULIHA, Amir [University of Utah] a.hajrasouliha@utah.edu
This research investigates the impact of university campus form and location on creating a sustainable and livable
learning environment. The statistical population is universities with high research activities in the United States of
America, which are 206 universities according to the Carnegie Classification 2010. I randomly selected half of the
total population – 103 campuses – stratified by region and university type, as the statistical samples. Using
Structural Equation Modeling (SEM), three latent variables can be generated as the measures of campus form: (1)
the degree of urbanization of campus, (2) the degree of campus greenness, and (3) the degree of on-campus

housing. With SEM I tested the impact of campus form on a selection of outcome variables such as: (1) “freshman
retention rate” as a proxy for “overall satisfaction with college life”, (2) “six years graduation rate” as a proxy for
“learning environment”, (3) “crime rate” as a proxy for safety, (4) “travel mode” as a proxy for pedestrian and
transit-friendly environment. Analysis of travel mode will include both students’ journey to school and university
employees’ journey to work.
I have controlled the impact of campus form on the desired outcomes with a set of variables: (1) average SAT
score as a proxy for student selectivity, (2) the percentage of classes with fewer than 20 student as a proxy of
faculty resources, (3) type of institution (public/private & Research I/Research II), (4) enrollment profile
classification, (5) the median households income of city 2013, (6) crime rate of city, (7) the degree of urbanization
of setting, (8) the total cooling and heating days index as a proxy for climate. The hypothesized structural
equation models displayed significant correlations between at least one of the three campus form dimensions
with the outcome variables considering control variables. As an example, the results show that all three campus
form variables had significant positive correlation with freshman retention rate. 1 unit increase for urbanization
latent variable (with the range of 1.90), can increase the freshman retention by 4.8 percent. 1 units increase for
greenness latent variable (with the range of 37.75) can increase the freshman retention by 0.2 percent. Also, 1
percent more on-campus residents can increase freshman retention by almost 0.1 percent. Overall, this research
highlights the correlations of campus form and certain university objectives, such as student satisfaction, learning
outcomes, safety, and travel mode.
References
 Kenney, D. R., Dumont, R., & Kenney, G. S. (2005). Mission and place: Strengthening learning and
community through campus design. Greenwood Publishing Group.
 Strange, C. C., & Banning, J. H. (2001). Educating by Design: Creating Campus Learning Environments
That Work. The Jossey-Bass Higher and Adult Education Series. Jossey-Bass, 350 Sansome St., San
Francisco, CA 94104-1342.
 Kline, R. B. (2011). Principles and practice of structural equation modeling. Guilford press.
 Long, L. D. (2014). Does It Matter Where College Students Live? Differences in Satisfaction and
Outcomes as a Function of Students’ Living Arrangement and Gender. The Journal of College and
University Student Housing, 40(2), 66-85.
 Brooks, R. (2005). Measuring university quality. The Review of Higher Education, 29(1), 1-21.

Abstract Index #: 226
ESTABLISHING A FAITH-BASED AGENDA FOR THE PLANNING PROFESSION
Abstract System ID#: 281
Individual Paper
SANDERS, Tonya [Morgan State University] tonya.sanders@morgan.edu
There is much discussion about religion in the public square. With extremist organizations such as Boko Haram,
ISIL/ISIS, al-Qaida/al-Qa`ida, HAMAS, to local American organizations such as Freedom From Religion Foundation
to a real fear in some parts of the U.S. about Sharia/Shariah Law being instituted. To say it is a difficult time to
talk about religion is an understatement. However, planning as been conspicuously silent on the topic of faithbased community development.
Other disciplines have dedicated spaces and journals to discuss the intersection of religion with their discipline
(i.e., Sociology of Religion Journal, Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, etc.). Many scholars from other
disciplines consistently address the influence of religious within their discipline (i.e., Ram Cnaan, social work;
Stephanie Boddie, social work; Robert Wineburg, social work, Mark Chasvas, sociology of religion, Nancy
Ammerman, sociology of religion, Jo Anne Schneider, social scientist, Michael Leo Owens, political science, and
the list goes on). Within planning, there are very few voices in the wilderness like
Nisha Botchwey, June Manning Thomas, Jeffrey Lowe, Laura Reese, Sigmund Ship, and myself, who are striving to
highlight the prominent role that faith-based organizations play in community development.

By using a qualitative content analysis examining specific themes in these individuals work, my research will map
out an agenda going forward how planning as a discipline can better engage faith-based organizations in
community development, economic development, community engagement, and community organizing.
It is imperative that now planning has a strong voice in this changing and shifting landscape and is able to
contribute to the larger discussion on faith-based community development and give guidance to those in the field
of religion, who leverage the capacity of their place of worship to be engine to drive change in their comminuty.
References
 Beaumont, J. (2008). Faith action on urban social issues. Urban Studies, 45 2019
 Beaumont, J. (2008). Introduction Faith-based Organizations and Urban Social Issues. Urban Studies 45
(10) 2011
 Biebricher, T. (2011). Faith-based initiatives and the challenges of governance. Public Administration 89,
3, 1001-1014
 Bielefeld, W. and Cleveland, W. S. (2013). Faith-based organizations as service providers and their
relationship to government. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 42, 468
 Burchardt, M. (2013). Faith-based organizational change and everyday meaning in South Africa.
Sociology of Religion, 74 (1), 30-55

Abstract Index #: 227
THE CHANGING GEOGRAPHY OF URBAN EDUCATION: MARKET TRANSITION AND STUDENT SORTING IN
SHANGHAI, CHINA
Abstract System ID#: 290
Individual Paper
WANG, Rui [UCLA] ruiwang@ucla.edu
School quality plays a key role in residential sorting and spatial segregation in most city with housing markets
and residence-based enrollment policy. In Chinese city, however, both housing markets and school enrollment
based on residence (and home ownership) are relatively new phenomena. Whether and the extent to which
student performance reflects residential sorting remains an examined question in Chinese city. This study
compares 15-year old students in different public middle and high schools in Shanghai in 2009 and 2012 using
data from the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA). We find (1) student performance is more
related to family background in middle school while more associated with school quality in high school; (2) a
higher degree of cross-school socioeconomic sorting among students in middle schools than in high schools; (3)
an increasingly more important role of family socioeconomic background in explaining student performance over
time. These findings correspond well to the development of the housing market and the different enrollment
policies in middle versus high schools in Shanghai. This study provides an early piece of evidence of the
development of the spatial socioeconomic sorting of urban households and its relationship to student academic
performance, a crucial predictor of future individual development. As in many parts of the world, how to address
the education inequality and social mobility implications of such residential sorting has become an important
question for policymakers in Chinese city transitioning toward the market economy.

Abstract Index #: 228
A METHOD FOR PRIORITIZING DEMOLITIONS IN A LEGACY CITY
Abstract System ID#: 358
Individual Paper
MORCKEL, Victoria [University of Michigan] morckel@umich.edu

Legacy city (also known as shrinking city) are city that have experienced substantial job and population
losses for decades due to forces like deindustrialization. These city face complex challenges, like vacancy and
abandonment, which are exacerbated by decreases in tax revenues and increases in demands for services. Given
the abundance of vacant properties in these city, tough decisions need to be made regarding future  land_use.
Some legacy city, like Detroit and Flint, Michigan, have already determined that parts of their city will be dedensified or naturalized due to low housing demand. But strategies are needed to make these future  land_uses
happen. One way to eliminate blight and to provide opportunities for new  land_uses is through demolition.
Given historic and ongoing population losses, many legacy city turn to demolition as one solution to their
surplus property problems. Demolitions are often deemed necessary because of the scale of the vacant property
problem. While preservation and rehabilitation are certainly desirable, these strategies are not feasible or even
appropriate in every neighborhood. Instead, strategies like preservation, rehabilitation, and demolition need to
be targeted to specific neighborhood or area of the city based on sound planning principles. To date, few city
have derived empirical methods for determining which structures should be demolished. As far as the author is
aware, no study in the planning literature has been conducted on strategic demolition methods, nor have studies
compared the outcomes of different demolition strategies.
Given that demolition is a tool that legacy city are, in many cases, aggressively using, the lack of studies on
demolition activity represents a serious gap in the literature. If  land_use is within the purview of planners and
demolition is necessary to rethink  land_use in legacy city, then we, as a profession, need to be concerned with
both the methods and outcomes of this activity. Because legacy city lack the resources to demolish all of the
properties that should come down, policy makers are faced with the tough decision of which properties to
demolish now, and which properties have to wait (in some cases for years or decades) for some unknown future
funding source. Unfortunately, these decisions have tended to be based on property conditions or political
pressures alone (such as vocal neighbors or community groups), not on city-wide planning principles or strategy.
This paper will therefore add to the literature by outlining an empirical method for prioritizing demolitions citywide, using the example of Youngstown, Ohio. The author uses geographic information system to assign each
property a demolition score based on four factors: property characteristics, neighborhood vacancy,
neighborhood potential, and crime. The factors have various measures which are weighted depending upon their
importance in the literature. Properties with higher scores are deemed stronger candidates for timely demolition.
In addition to creating a list of properties, the proposed method can facilitate the creation of hot spot maps of
prospective demolitions, which can then be used to target neighborhood for federal or other funding.
Furthermore, the list of properties and the variables that were used to prioritize the properties can become the
foundation for a formal demolition or blight-elimination plan. All three outcomes of the prioritization method (a
property list, hot spot map, and demolition plan) will be discussed in greater detail during the presentation.
Policy implications will be discussed, as well.
References
 Griswold, N., Calnin, B., Schramm, M., Anselin, L., & Boehnlein, P. (2013). Estimating the effect of
demolishing distressed structures in Cleveland, OH, 2009-2013. Executive Summary. Western Reserve
Land Conservancy Thriving comminuty Institute: From Vacancy to Vitality.
 Johnson, M., Hollander, J., & Hallulli, A. (2014). Maintain, demolish, re-purpose: Policy design for vacant
land management using decision models. city, 40(B), 151-162. doi: 10.1016/j.cities.2013.05.005
 Mallach, A., & Brachman, L. (2013). Regenerating America's legacy city. Cambridge, MA: Lincoln
Institute of Land Policy.
 Nassauer, J., & Raskin, J. (2014). Urban vacancy and  land_use legacies: A frontier for urban ecological
research, design, and planning. Landscape and urban_planning, 125, 245-253.
 Schilling, J. & Logan, J. (2008). Greening the rust belt: A green infrastructure model for right sizing
America’s shrinking city. Journal of the American Planning Association, 74(4), 451-466.

Abstract Index #: 229
AFTER THE PROJECTS: EXPLAINING VARIATION IN APPROACHES TO PUBLIC HOUSING TRANSFORMATION IN
THE UNITED STATES
Abstract System ID#: 306
Pre-organized Session: High Hopes vs. Reality in Public Housing Reforms
VALE, Lawrence [MIT] ljvale@mit.edu
The nation-wide transformation of public housing in the United States has not been happening evenly or equally.
Rather, HUD’s HOPE VI (Housing Opportunities for People Everywhere) initiative--a national program that has
expended more than $8 billion to redevelop more than 250 public housing projects since 1993--has been
implemented in wildly different ways, with markedly different intents, yielding dramatically different results. This
paper, drawing on data supplied by HUD that has been cross-checked with other sources, attempts to provide the
first full national picture of the types of mixed-income comminuty produced under HOPE VI, and attempts a
first-ever comparison between what was proposed and what actually got built.
Public housing redevelopment under HOPE VI occupies a continuum between two attitudinal poles: one that
favors creation of comminuty that minimize the post-redevelopment presence of the poorest, and one that
attempts to retain public housing residents as the majority in the new community, while nonetheless seeking to
mix incomes in more subtle ways. The mixed-income comminuty deployed in HOPE VI projects encompass a
heterogeneous set of projects, which differ widely on several dimensions: 1) the distribution and range of
household incomes included in the redevelopment effort, 2) the spatial strategy for mixing different income
groups together, 3) the proportion of dwelling units assigned to homeownership and rental housing, and 4) the
length of time that selected housing units are guaranteed to be subsidized for low-income families, and 5) the
relative income levels of residents living in the surrounding neighborhood.
Moreover, there are often marked differences between what was initially proposed in a HOPE VI application, and
what was eventually realized. Even though all 250+ public housing redevelopment projects received funding from
the same federal program and were bound by the same federal regulations unless they received exemptions,
local housing authorities and their partners exercised considerable discretion over the final form of mixed-income
projects. This discretion reveals distinct choices about where and how low-income families should be housed. Of
equal importance, in some places the long delays in implementation—whether caused by real estate downturns,
tenant resistance, or both—often contributed to significant changes between the promises of the plans and the
realities of the built result.
Based on a preliminary analysis of HOPE VI proposals sent to HUD, most redevelopment efforts stipulated that
extremely low-income public housing families should constitute a minority of residents in the new community.
Some redevelopments even intended to have a majority of units occupied by relatively wealthy households who
would pay market rate rents. Conversely, some HOPE VI proposals allocated the overwhelming majority of
apartments in a project to low-income public housing residents, while others favored substantial tiers of
“affordable” housing that offered included shallower subsidies for working families who might never apply for
public housing but still had relatively low incomes. The latter kind of community can house people with a variety
of incomes, even though all or nearly all of those incomes are still considered “low.” Because vastly different
social, economic, financial, and spatial mixes share the name “mixed-income”, many kinds of comminuty have
been too easily lumped together under the same term. HOPE VI seems best conceptualized as an umbrella that
covers quite a large variety of local practices and strategies.
References
 Cisneros, H. and Engdahl, L., eds. (2009. From Despair to Hope: HOPE VI and the new promise of public
housing in America’s city. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
 Graves, E. (2011). Mixed outcomes housing: comparing policy goals to resident outcomes in mixedincome housing. Journal of the American Planning Association 77 (2).
 Joseph, M. (2006). Is Mixed-Income Development an Antidote to Urban Poverty? Housing Policy Debate
17 (2), 209-234.




Schwartz, A. & Tajbakjsh, K. (1997). Mixed-income housing: Unanswered questions. Cityscape, 3 (2), 7192.
Vale, L.J. (2013). Purging the poorest: Public housing and the design politics of twice-cleared
communities. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Abstract Index #: 230
LEGACY CITY REVITALIZATION: EXAMINING THE ROLE OF HISTORIC REHABILITATION TAX CREDIT INVESTMENTS
Abstract System ID#: 308
Pre-organized Session: Legacy city: The Quest for Revitalization
KINAHAN, Kelly [Cleveland State University] k.kinahan@vikes.csuohio.edu
The U.S. legacy city narrative is dominated by the struggles of these places with regard to population loss,
economic restructuring, and disinvestment (Dewar & Thomas, 2013). These conditions have resulted in high
levels of abandonment and vacancy, and have fostered an array of policy initiatives that are focused on
demolition and vacant land management. However, historic buildings and neighborhood are consistently noted
as key assets for legacy city stabilization (Mallach & Brachman, 2013) and the federal historic rehabilitation tax
credit (RTC) is one historic preservation tool that has been used to rehabilitate the urban fabric of these places.
This research adds to existing scholarship examining the role of preservation in legacy city by evaluating the
neighborhood-level  impact of federal RTC investments in five large legacy city (Baltimore, Cleveland,
Philadelphia, Richmond, and St. Louis). Previous research has shown that the RTC contributed to growth in
downtown housing (Ryberg-Webster, 2013) and supported place-based neighborhood revitalization initiatives
(Ryberg-Webster, 2014). Other scholars have noted links between historic preservation efforts and gentrification
outcomes including the displacement of low-income residents and racial homogenization (Smith, 1998), but few
have tested this contention with rigorous quantitative methods. This research expands upon these literature
threads by building an empirical model to test the effects of RTC investments in legacy city on three indicators
serving as proxies for gentrification related outcomes - change in total households, racial diversity, and economic
diversity - at the census tract level.
A dataset from the National Parks Service provides address-level information about federal RTC projects
occurring between 1997 and 2010, and is used in conjunction with U.S. Census data. Descriptive statistics and a
difference-in-difference regression model are the primary methods used to answer the paper’s two research
questions: (1) what is the spatial distribution of RTC projects across the legacy city landscape? (2) what are the
impacts of RTC investments in RTC neighborhood versus a comparison group of non-RTC neighborhood
between 2000 and 2010 on three outcome measures? The outcomes are measured using U.S. Census data
including change in total households; race variables representing the interaction among whites, blacks, Hispanics,
and other races; and economic diversity as measured by the ratio of residents with a bachelor’s degree or greater
educational attainment to the number of persons in poverty.
Preliminary findings indicate that RTC investments are well distributed across the spatial landscape of the five
legacy city. Additionally, RTC neighborhood are more likely to experience greater increases in total
households. Change in economic diversity is mixed across the five city, with Baltimore being the only city that
appears to follow classic gentrification patterns. Racial diversity is increasing slightly in RTC neighborhood, but
at about the same rate as the comparison neighborhood in most city.
This work sheds light on the process of neighborhood revitalization in the broader context of decline and
provides valuable insights for planners and policymakers working to improve the conditions of legacy city and
their neighborhood. It also sharpens our understanding of the relationship between historic tax credit
investments and neighborhood outcomes within the legacy city context, and sets the course for future research
focused on deciphering the processes of neighborhood ascent in declining city and regions.
References
 Dewar, M., & Thomas, J. M. (Eds.). (2012). The city after abandonment. University of Pennsylvania Press.






Mallach, A. & Brachman, L. (2013). Regenerating America’s Legacy city. Cambridge, MA: Lincoln
Institute of Land Policy.
Ryberg-Webster, S. (2013). Preserving downtown America: Federal rehabilitation tax credits and the
transformation of US city. Journal of the American Planning Association, 79(4), 266-279.
Ryberg-Webster, S. (2014). The landscape of urban preservation: A spatial analysis of federal
rehabilitation tax incentives in Richmond, Virginia. Journal of Urban Affairs (accepted for publication).
Smith, N. (1998). Comment on David Listokin, Barbara Listokin, and Michael Lahr's “The contributions of
historic preservation to housing and economic development”: Historic preservation in a neoliberal age.
Housing Policy Debate, 9, 3.

Abstract Index #: 231
COMPARING EVOLUTION OF MOBILITY PATTERNS OF GENERATION Y AND GENERATION X: A STUDY OF THE
GREATER TORONTO AREA
Abstract System ID#: 310
Pre-organized Session: Millennials in the City: Trends and Forecasts
AGARWAL, Ajay [Queen's University] agarwala@queensu.ca, presenting author, primary author
COLLINS, Patricia [Queen's University] patricia.collins@queensu.ca
MOOS, Markus [University of Waterloo] mmoos@uwaterloo.ca
Using 1986-2011 household travel survey data from the Greater Toronto Area, this paper examines evolution of
mobility pattern of Generation Y and compares the same to that of Generation X. The paper finds that teenagers
and young adults from Generation Y are obtaining their driver’s license later; using public transit more; and
driving marginally less as compared to the preceding generation. However, these differences begin to diminish
as the young adults from generation Y reach their early 30s. The observed “lag” in driving is consistent with the
"delay” in forming families/partnerships and bearing children in Generation Y. It remains to be established
whether or not the presently observed mobility trends will continue even after Generation Y households include
young child/children.

Abstract Index #: 232
THE INTERDEPENDENCE OF HOUSEHOLD AND BUSINESS RECOVERY DECISIONS AFTER HURRICANE SANDY
Abstract System ID#: 331
Individual Paper
XIAO, Yu [Texas A&M University] yuxiao@tamu.edu, presenting author, primary author
CHANDRASEKHAR, Divya [Texas Southern University] divya.chandrasekhar@gmail.com
FINN, Donovan [Stony Brook University] donovanfinn@yahoo.com
With climate change and rapid population growth in coastal area, comminuty are facing increased risk of
disasters that can affect the lives of many people. What hinders effective policy-making and assistance provision
for long-term community recovery after a major disaster is a lack of theoretical understanding of how
socioeconomic system adjust in the wake of a severe shock and the paths these system take to reestablish
themselves. Current research, given the difficulty of studying such complex system, has instead tended to
address one sector of recovery at a time—housing and reconstruction, business recovery, economic recovery, or
recovery policy.
After a major disaster socioeconomic system are constantly adjusting to changing supply and demand conditions
and this is reflected in the recovery decisions of households and businesses. These decisions are highly
interrelated and their interaction can become a critical determinant of overall community recovery. Households
and businesses are interrelated through the market economy system. Despite its significance, only a few studies
have focused specifically on the dynamics of this relationship. The most substantial of these efforts has been
undertaken by Chang & Miles (2007) who attempted to create an urban recovery framework that simulates

interactions between households, business, and the built environment to measure community recovery
outcomes, and more recently by Xiao and Van Zandt (2012) who modeled the interaction of households and
business recovery, finding that they are spatially interlinked. While useful in their insights, these studies have
their limitations. Chang & Miles depend largely on secondary, aggregate data to measure outcomes of recovery
at a community-wide scale, which does not adequately capture the nuances of household and business recovery
decision-making. Xiao and Van Zandt’s study improves upon this by using primary survey methods for data
collection, but are still limited in their explanation of how household and businesses decisions adjust to each
other’s decision processes over time and space. Given its role in guiding outcomes for community recovery, there
is need for more research how and why business and household recovery are interdependent at the local level.
The goal of this study is to capture the interplay of recovery decision-making by households and businesses,
thereby improving understanding of both why (i.e. the reasons) community recovery happens, or fails to, on
ground, and also how (i.e. the mechanics). Specifically, we ask the following research questions: To what extent
was household’s decision to come back to the same neighborhood after a disaster depended on jobs and
community services? And to what extent was business’s recovery decisions dependent on household recovery?
Data was collected through random sample surveys of 2,000 households and 2,000 businesses in disasteraffected counties of Brooklyn, Queens, and Richmond (Staten Island) in New York City in 2013. Data was also
collected through in-depth key informant interviews of households and businesses in three specific New York
neighborhoods (Red Hook in Brooklyn, The Rockaways in Queens, and Midland Beach in Staten Island). Survey
data was analyzed using descriptive and inferential statistics, and interview and document data using qualitative
content analysis techniques. The results of this research study can provide insights on why and how households
and businesses decide to come back to the same community after disasters.
References
 Chang, S., & Miles, S. (2007). Simulation Model of Urban Disaster Recovery and Resilience:
Implementation for the 1994 Northridge Earthquake. Buffalo, NY: Multidisciplinary Center for
Earthquake Engineering Research.
 Xiao, Y and Zandt, SV (2012) Building Community Resiliency: Spatial Links between Households and
Businesses in Post-Disaster Recovery. Urban Studies 49(11): 2523-2542.
 Zhang, Y, Lindell, MK and Prater, CS (2008) Vulnerability of community businesses to environment
disasters. Disasters doi:10.1111/j.1467-7717.2008.01061.x.

Abstract Index #: 233
AN ANTIDOTE TO SPRAWL OR SUBURBIA REFRAMED?: AN OVERVIEW OF THE AMENITIES THAT DRIVE NEW
COMMUNITIES
Abstract System ID#: 342
Individual Paper
BUCKMAN, Stephen [University of South Florida] buckmans@umich.edu, presenting author, primary author
RIEKES TRIVERS, Ian [University of Michigan] ianrt@umich.edu
KAYANAN, Carla Maria [University of Michigan] kayanan@umich.edu
BLACK, Tristan [Arizona State University] tristan.black@asu.edu
The suburban built form of unregulated development resulting in sprawl is not a new phenomenon, rather it is
and has been the dominant land form since the early 20th century. As the impact of unrestrained sprawl has
included negative environment, financial, and social issues, various techniques have been incorporated to
combat these  impact (Dunham-Jones and Williamson, 2009; Schmitz et al, 2003; Friedman, 2002). A prominent
movement to provide alternative development patterns to unrestrained growth has been the planned
community, which has ranged from Garden city like Welwyn and Letchworth in England to New Urbanism sites
such as Seaside and Stapleton in the United States. Each of these examples looked to build comminuty that
were holistic in nature, allowing for mixed-uses to take place within the confines of the development. A
community located outside of the urban core that still possess many of the amenities of the core is at the heart
of the planned community (Forsyth, 2005; Talen, 2005).

Throughout much of the history of planned comminuty the social and environment ideals of the movement
have been lost in their translation to capitalist development. The envisioned self-sufficiency of the Garden City
became the pastoral Garden Suburb, the dynamic ideal of the New Town a relative blip compared to prevalence
of the simple master planned bedroom community. This paper looks at one example of a planned community,
which has been and continues to be promoted as a key tool for managing rapid urbanization throughout the
world: New comminuty. New comminuty are large-scale, master planned and managed urban units promoted
as alternatives to traditional, sprawling suburban development. As pseudo self-contained mini-cities, New
Communities embody many of the ideals of smart growth minus the connections to existing comminuty and
collaborative planning (Forsyth, 2005).

Amenities are understood to play a key role in the success of New comminuty as alternatives to sprawling
suburban development. First, they are used to created desirable spaces that lure residents to locate to them.
Second, once residents have been attracted to the community, amenities help to organize their daily activities in
ways that fulfill the promise of a less sprawling urban lifestyle. The careful consideration of amenities is a key
aspect that separates New comminuty from standard master planned suburban comminuty and has a direct
influence on reducing sprawl.
In this paper we seek to understand claims made by developers in the U.S. and the U.K. that New comminuty
can combat sprawl. We analyze a survey of the development community on the topic of amenities in New
Communities. Based on responses we conclude that the development community sees New comminuty as
more akin to traditional family focused bedroom suburbs with less robust amenities than necessary to provide
the promised alternative to sprawl.
References
 Dunham-Jones, Ellen and June Williamson, 2009. Retrofitting Suburbia: Urban Design Solutions for
Redesigning Suburbs. John Wiley and Sons: Hoboken, New Jersey.
 Friedman, Avi, 2002. Planning the New Suburbia: Flexibility by Design. Vancouver: UBC Press
 Forsyth, Ann, 2005. Reforming Suburbia: The Planned comminuty of Irvine, Columbia and The
Woodlands. Berkeley: University of California Press.
 Schmitz, Adrienne, Pam Engebretson, Fredrick Merril, Sarah Peck, Robert Santos, Krisin Shewfelt, Debra
Stein, John Torti, and Marilee Utter, 2003. The New Shape of Suburbia: Trends in Residential
Development. Washington D.C.: Urban Land Institute.
 Talen, Emily, 2005. New Urbanism and American Planning: The Conflict of Cultures. New York:
Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 234
DO LANDSCAPE SPATIAL PATTERNS MATTER TO SINGLE-FAMILY PROPERTY VALUES?
Abstract System ID#: 354
Individual Paper
RODIEK, Susan [Texas A&M University] srodiek@arch.tamu.edu, presenting author, primary author
KIM, Jun Hyun [Texas A&M University] jhkim@arch.tamu.edu
LI, Wei [Texas A&M University] wli@tamu.edu
PARK, Sun Young [Texas A&M University] sypark0014@gmail.com
Background: Many previous empirical studies have assessed the influence of urban green space on economic
value and documented several positive relationships between the urban natural environment and property value.
Urban natural environments including trees and urban forests provide a wide range of ecological benefits
including air and water pollution mitigation, habitat for wildlife, and storm water runoff reduction as well as
social benefits to neighborhood by improving quality of life through decreasing crime rate and promoting
community involvement. Positive health benefits of urban green space range from decreasing childhood obesity,

asthma relief, and shorter recovery times for patients, to improved academic performance. However, although
many empirical studies have examined the economic value of urban green space over the decades, they would
not effectively capture the quality of urban greenery as they measured the value of urban natural environments
calculating the total quantity of vegetation from aggregated  land_use data, and/or the proximity of a property to
nearby green spaces. While a few studies have attempted to capture the quality of urban natural environments
with objective measurements, the role of landscape spatial patterns shaped by urban forests on property value
has not been examined sufficiently.
Purpose and Methods: The main aims of this study were to assess the relationship between landscape spatial
patterns of urban forests and property value of single family houses by applying the landscape indices to the
hedonic pricing model, and find which characteristic of landscape patterns is the strongest predictor of the
housing value. To measure property values and housing structures, 8,551 housing transaction records from 2010
to 2012 in the city of Austin, TX were collected. To quantify the quality of landscape spatial patterns, this research
used several landscape indices after classifying land cover types surrounding a property using Geographic
Information system (GIS) and remote sensing using the high-resolution Digital Orthophoto Quarter Quadrangle
(DOQQ) aerial photo imagery. FRAGSTATS, a spatial pattern analysis program, was utilized to compute various
landscape indices for a half-mile airline buffer around each of the selected single family houses. Bivariate
analyses and multiple regression models were used to predict single family property values.
Results: In addition to several significant correlates from housing characteristics including the total living area,
existence of a pool, and waterfront view, the results showed that larger tree area surrounding a single family
home were positively correlated with higher housing transaction value (p<.001), while more isolated landscape
spatial patterns (p<.001), more fragmented conditions (p<.001), and more irregularly shaped landscape spatial
patterns (p<.001) were negatively associated with the transaction price.
Conclusion: This study helps fill a gap in the existing body of literature by assessing the influence of the quality of
urban green space assessed by quantitative methods on single family housing value. The results of this research
could be reflected in community design and planning policy, through increased awareness of the role of urban
green spaces, and linking their spatial structure to design guidelines and frameworks to promote economic
benefits.
References
 Geoghegan, J. (2002). The value of open space in residential  land_use. The Journal of  land_use Policy, 19,
91-98.
 Harting, T., Johansson, G., & Kylin, C. (2003). Residence in the social ecology of stress and restoration.
Journal of Social Issues, 59(3), 611-636.
 Kim, J.-H., Lee, C., Olvera, N., and Ellis, C.D. (2014). The role of landscape spatial patterns on obesity in
Hispanic children residing inner-city neighborhood. Journal of Physical Activity and Health. 11(8),
1449~1457.
 Li, W., and Saphores, J-D. (2012). A spatial hedonic analysis of the value of urban land cover in the
multifamily housing market in Los Angeles, CA. The Journal of Urban Studies, 49(12), 2597-2615.
 McGarigal, K., and Marks B.J. (1995). FRAGSTATS: Spatial pattern analysis program for quantifying
landscape structure: United Stated Department of Agriculture.

Abstract Index #: 235
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS: ADDRESSING URBAN INEQUALITY THROUGH URBAN
DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
Abstract System ID#: 355
Individual Paper
ROSEN, Jovanna [University of Southern California] jovannar@usc.edu

Policies such as community benefits agreements and project labor agreements have recently proliferated in land
development and infrastructure. These community development agreements attempt to leverage urban growth
to promote community development and social justice (Saito & Truong, 2014). In so doing, they constitute a new
way to govern land development, one that can either circumvent or supplement existing  land_use approval and
policy formulation procedures, in favor of deliberation directly between stakeholders to create policy through
agreement (Been, 2010; Erie, Kogan & MacKenzie, 2010; Wolf-Powers, 2010). I use two PLA case studies and two
CBA case studies to examine agreement implementation. I assess how these agreements succeed or fail to
change existing patterns of inequality and urban development practices.
Project labor agreements (PLAs) are “collective bargaining agreements between contractors, or owners on behalf
of contractors, and labor unions in the construction industry” (U.S. General Accounting Office or GAO, 1998). In
contrast, community benefits agreements (CBAs) are “a documented bargain outlining a set of programmatic and
material commitments that a private developer has made to win political support from the residents of a
development area and others claiming a stake in its future” (Wolf-Powers, 2010, p. 141). In theory, community
development agreements enable community stakeholders to become influential participants in the development
process and to employ community resources to determine the agreement specifics (Parkin, 2003). As such, the
community development agreement approach tries to build upon lessons learned from urban renewal and
disinvestment, in which marginalized residents did not have meaningful input into the development projects that
disrupted their comminuty (Lucas-Darby, 2012).
Community development agreements are becoming increasingly common throughout the United States. The first
significant CBA occurred in 2001 in Los Angeles. It governed the $2.5 billion Staples Center development in
downtown Los Angeles, and included $390 million in public subsidies and tax rebates. Since then, CBAs have
proliferated throughout the U.S. (Saito & Truong, 2014; Wolf-Powers, 2010). While project labor agreements
have existed since the 1930s, PLAs have been used to foster community development since the Port of Oakland
Project Labor Agreement, formulated in the early 2000s (Johnston-Dodds, 2001). Subsequently, PLAs are
increasingly employed to attempt to enhance regional equity, such as the Los Angeles County Metropolitan
Transportation Authority (Metro) Project Labor Agreement, which concerns $40 billion in public infrastructure
funding (Metro, n.d.). The Obama Administration formally advocated for more PLAs concerning public
infrastructure, such that PLAs will likely become even more common (The White House, 2009).
Even though these agreements have become important to urban development, little research so far has
examined how these agreements come about, their implementation, or their outcomes for community
development. Early evidence suggests that these agreements produce mixed results; some community
development agreements experience only partial implementation and fail to achieve their articulated goals (Saito
& Truong, 2014; Hutson, 2013; Saito, 2012; Salkin & Lavine, 2008; Parkin, 2003). However, existing research
largely overlooks implementation, how community development agreements fit into larger governance issues,
and how CBAs relate to similar agreement types (Saito & Truong, 2014; Wolf-Powers, 2010).
In this paper, I generate four comparative case studies, using data from stakeholder interviews and archival
research. I examine two project labor agreement case studies (the Los Angeles Country Metropolitan
Transportation Authority Project Labor Agreement and the Yesler Terrace Community Workforce Agreement in
Seattle, Washington) and two community benefits agreements case studies (the Park East Corridor
Redevelopment, in Milwaukee, WI; and the Gates Rubber Factory Redevelopment, in Denver, CO) to assess
community development agreement implementation.
References
 Been, V. (2010). Community benefits agreements: A new local government tool or another variation on
the exactions theme? University of Chicago Law Review, 77(1), 5-35.
 Johnston-Dodds, K. (2001, October). Constructing California: A review of project labor agreements.
California Research Bureau. Retrieved from http://www.library.ca.gov/crb/01/10/01-010.pdf
 Parkin, J. (2003). Constructing meaningful access to work: Lessons from the Port of Oakland Project
Labor Agreement. Columbia Human Rights Law Review, 35, 375-414.




Saito, L. & Truong, J. (2014). The L.A. Live Community Benefits Agreement: Evaluating the agreement
results and shifting political power in the city. Urban Affairs Review, 1-27.
Wolf-Powers, L. (2010). Community benefits agreements and local government: A review of recent
evidence. Journal of the American Planning Association, 76(2), 141-159.

Abstract Index #: 236
EXPLORING ACTIVITY ENGAGEMENT AND TIME USE OF MILLENNIALS
Abstract System ID#: 356
Pre-organized Session: Broad Scale  impact of Millennials in the City
MCDONALD, Noreen [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] noreen@unc.edu, presenting author, primary
author
MOKHTARIAN, Patricia [Georgia Tech] patmokh@gatech.edu
MORRIS, Eric [Clemson University] emorri7@clemson.edu
PENDYALA, Ram [Georgia Tech] ram.pendyala@ce.gatech.edu
GARIKAPATI, Venu [Arizona State University] vgarikap@asu.edu
There has been considerable debate over the past few years on the activity, travel, and time use patterns of
young adults, often referred to as individuals of the millennial generation. Millennials are individuals born
between 1980 and 2000. Recent evidence suggests that this group of individuals, largely born and bred in an era
of ubiquitous technology, is exhibiting mobility patterns that are different from those of its predecessor cohorts.
This group has been found to delay the acquisition of driver’s licenses, exhibit lower rates of car ownership, and
undertake fewer trips and travel fewer miles on a daily basis. There are a variety of hypotheses that have been
postulated to explain this difference in travel and activity participation among the millennials including
substitution of virtual mobility for physical mobility, structural changes due to the Great Recession, and changing
preferences and attitudes.
Approach
This study is an attempt to explore and unravel the activity and time use patterns of the millennial generation
using the American Time Use Survey (ATUS) series. The American Time Use Survey (ATUS) has been conducted
annually by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) in the United States for just over 10 years. Recently, the Bureau
has released the 2003-2013 multiyear time use data set covering time use records and information for the entire
series of data. This data set provides valuable longitudinal information on the activity and time use patterns of
individuals aged 15 years and over a 10 year span that includes the period of the worst recession in recent
memory. Although this series of data does not constitute a panel data set, the longitudinal information in the
multi-year data set can be analyzed to see how activity-travel patterns have changed over time for specific age
groups, and how the recession may have played a major role in shaping activity and time use patterns. The
individuals who were 19-30 years of age in 2003-2004 (the early years of the ATUS) would have turned 29-40
years of age towards the end of the period covered by the multiyear data. By comparing the activity and time use
patterns of 19-24 and 25-30 year old cohorts across the years, the evolution in the behavior of this age group can
be studied and allow us to investigate intercohort and within cohort change. This type of cohort longitudinal
analysis will help shed considerable light on how activity and time use patterns change over time, and offers the
explicit ability to account for the period of recession and its effects on activity, travel, and time use.
Relevance
In summary, this research is intended to offer a detailed exploratory and longitudinal analysis of the activity and
time use patterns of millennials to better understand how and why their patterns are different and, the
implications for well-being. It will also develop behavioral constructs that can help inform how millennials may be
evolving over time in terms of their activity and time use patterns. Such insights are critical to ensuring that
travel demand forecasting models are positioned to answer the policy questions of an evolving demographic.

References
 Blumenberg, E., Taylor, B. D., Smart, M., Ralph, K., Wander, M., & Brumbaugh, S. (2012). What's youth
got to do with it? Exploring the travel behavior of teens and young adults No. UCTC-FR-2012-14).
Berkeley, CA: University of California Transportation Center.
 Delbosc, A., & Currie, G. (2013). Causes of youth licensing decline: A synthesis of evidence. Transport
Reviews, 33(3), 271-290.
 Kuhnimhof, T., Armoogum, J., Buehler, R., Dargay, J., Denstadli, J. M., & Yamamoto, T. (2012). Men
shape a downward trend in car use among young adults—evidence from six industrialized countries.
Transport Reviews, 32(6), 761-779
 Millard‐Ball, A., & Schipper, L. (2011). Are we reaching peak travel? trends in passenger transportation in
eight industrialized countries. transportation Reviews, 31(3), 357-378.

Abstract Index #: 237
AFFORDABLE HOUSING program AND NEIGHBORHOOD DIVERSITY: A SPATIAL ANALYSIS IN HARRIS
COUNTY, TEXAS
Abstract System ID#: 359
Individual Paper
PARK, Han [Texas A&M University] hpark@tamu.edu, presenting author, primary author
VAN ZANDT, Shannon [Texas A&M University] svanzandt@archmail.tamu.edu
LI, Wei [Texas A&M University] wli@tamu.edu
This study examines the effects of affordable housing program on neighborhood diversity based on a spatial
analysis in Harris County, Texas. Moving beyond the conventional definition of diversity as racial and ethnic
integration, this study holistically examines the distribution patterns of race/ethnicity, age and income at the
census block group level and how the selection criteria of affordable housing program impact the patterns.
Do housing assistance program criteria help people’s rental unit choice? Are there any specific limitations that
prevent targeted affordable housing program beneficiaries from maximizing the advantages of the program
when finding an ideal rental unit and their prospective neighborhood? We investigate important criteria of the
major affordable housing program, sometimes working as barriers to potential affordable housing residents. It is
shown how much Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) recipients in Harris County maximize their rent over the Fair
Market Rents (FMR) and how the income levels of the recipients are compared to the criteria of Income Limits
(IL) of the county. The statistics of relationship between the Qualified Census Tracts (QCTs) for Low Income
Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) units and the diversity level in corresponding census tracts are analyzed. Together,
these analyses will determine whether those constraints significantly influence the choice of the rental house
units and neighborhood.
This research also examines the extent to which affordable housing residents are exposed to various
neighborhood amenities, pedestrian infrastructure, crimes and school quality. This session mainly examines the
patterns of the spatial autocorrelation of affordable housing recipients. GIS geocoded data sets of HCV and LIHTC
housing units are graphically shown with census block group amenities and other neighborhood characteristics.
Our spatial analysis reveals potential signs that clustered affordable housing units are being segregated from
neighborhoods with desirable environments. The data analyses are conducted and displayed using GIS spatial
analysis and spatial statistics.
The research suggests how urban planners can help affordable housing program to accommodate more diverse
groups in neighborhood. Some criteria of the current housing program have limited rental beneficiaries to
certain demographic groups living in dilapidated area. We can achieve the social equity of the housing program
such as increased neighborhood diversity across the whole county based on more detailed criteria of the housing
programs.

References
 Williamson, A. R., Smith, M. T., & Strambi-Kramer, M. (2009). Housing choice vouchers, the low-income
housing tax credit, and the federal poverty deconcentration goal. Urban Affairs Review, 45(1), 119-132.
 Varady, D. P., & Walker, C. C. (2000). Vouchering out distressed subsidized developments: Does moving
lead to improvements in housing and neighborhood conditions?. Housing Policy Debate, 11(1), 115-162.
 Basolo, V. (2013). Examining Mobility Outcomes in the Housing Choice Voucher Program: Neighborhood
Poverty, Employment, and Public School Quality. Cityscape, 15(2), 135-153.
 O'Regan, K. M., & Horn, K. M. (2013). What Can We Learn About the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit
Program by Looking at the Tenants?. Housing Policy Debate, 23(3), 597-613.
 McClure, K. (2010). Are low-income housing tax credit developments locating where there is a shortage
of affordable units?. Housing Policy Debate, 20(2), 153-171.

Abstract Index #: 238
DOWNTOWN HOUSING REVISITED
Abstract System ID#: 363
Pre-organized Session: Legacy city: The Quest for Revitalization
BIRCH, Eugenie [University of Pennsylvania] elbirch@upenn.edu
Ten years ago, the Brookings Institution published "Who Lives Downtown?" that captured my research based on
a national sample 44 downtowns from 1970-2000 The sample covered 18 percent of city having 100,000
population or more and represented 48 percent of the total population of these places. It included 90 percent of
the nation’s top ten city, 62 percent of the top fifty, and 28 percent of the bottom fifty. The sample downtowns
were spread among the four main Census regions and, though the number of a region’s sample city varied, they
closely reflected the distribution of the nation’s urban population. Finally, the sample included 13 Legacy city,
30% of the total. Local authorities defined their respective downtowns by designating tract coverage.
The report looked at downtown population, households and their composition, median income, educational
levels, racial and ethnic composition and tenure. It also compared residential growth rates in downtowns, city
and metropolitan statistical area. The results described the downtown living phenomenon and the socioeconomic characteristics of downtown residents within the frame of each downtown’s urban and metropolitan
environments.
The report concluded with a classification or typology of city performance based on each city’s growth trajectory,
quantity and density of the residential settlement patterns and key socio-economic characteristics of the
population. The four categories were: 1. Fully Developed Downtowns, 2. Emerging Downtowns, 3.Downtowns on
the Edge of Take-Off,” 4. Slow-Growing Downtowns and 5. Declining Downtowns.
Although the report did not single out Legacy city, as it turned out, this group of city experienced a
remarkable turnaround in the 1990-2000 decade with 77% increasing population. Of the remaining sample, only
70% exhibited positive growth. The question is did the trajectory continue?
This paper will revisit Who Lives Downtowns? to examine what has happened to the sample with regard
downtown residential growth post 2000, according to the measures used for the 1970- 2000 study. It will
examine the same socio-economic characteristics of the downtown population as did the 2005 study. Finally, it
will pay special attention to the performance of Legacy city.
As the US Census is collecting the data differently then it did for the earlier study, this study will rely on the
American Community Survey and Geolytics to reconcile the downtown census tract boundaries.
References
 Birch, E. 2009. Downtown in the New American City. Annals of the American Academy of Political and
Social Sciences. 626: 134-153.






Birch, E. 2005. Who Lives Downtown? The Brookings Institution: Metropolitan Policy Program:
Washington, DC.
Breen, A. and D. Rigby. 2005. Intown Living: A Different American Dream. Westport, CT. Praeger
Publishers.
Burayidi, M. 2013. Resilient Downtowns of Small Urban comminuty. London: Routledge.
Strom, E. 2009. Rethinking the Politics of Downtown Redevelopment. Journal of Urban Affairs. 30:1, 3761.

Abstract Index #: 239
THE CHANGING STRUCTURE OF MUNICIPAL PARK PROVISION
Abstract System ID#: 371
Pre-organized Session: Learning from Detroit
COOPER-MCCANN, Patrick [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] pcooperm@umich.edu
Nonprofit park conservancies fund and operate major public parks in dozens of U.S. city (Harnik & Martin 2015).
In 2007, New York City alone had 51 nonprofits dedicated to improving specific parks or its park system as a
whole (Brecher and Wise 2008). These numbers suggest that park nonprofits are not just a temporary response
to government cutbacks; they’re now an institutional feature of local governance. Yet beyond case studies of the
most prominent and well-funded park conservancies, we know little about these groups. What we do know
suggests the need for further study. Studies that compare park nonprofits have found major differences in terms
of capacity and goals: some park nonprofits raise hundreds of dollars each year, others raise millions; some push
for more public investment in parks, others push for less (Brecher and Wise 2008; Roy 2011). We can also expect
differences between park nonprofits and other organizations that play a role in the provision of municipal parks,
like “Adopt-a-Park” partners, “Friends of” groups, corporate partners, and other levels of government. But to
date, no studies of supplemental park provision have addressed these other types of organizations. If city are
going to incorporate supplemental provision into the administration of city services, then we need to understand
these differences so that local governments can effectively manage these partnerships and properly enforce
norms of democratic governance. This will require an analysis of the entire organizational field of park provision,
similar to previous studies on the structure of community development (Ferguson & Stoutland 1999; Yin 1998).
In this paper, I fill that gap through a case study of park provision in Detroit, a city where supplemental provision
is especially important due to the city’s enduring fiscal crisis. Using information drawn from government records,
nonprofit records, news media, social media, and word-of-mouth, I catalog park providers as comprehensively as
possible. The Detroit case reveals a much wider range of park providers than previous studies. In addition to
local government, these providers include churches, block clubs, and small businesses that sign agreements with
the city to “adopt” local parks; real estate interests that program public spaces downtown; county and state
authorities that provide grants for capital improvements and directly operate some parks, including the city’s
signature island park, Belle Isle; groups of committed residents that form “Friends of the Park” groups; and
community development organizations and social welfare nonprofits that have added park maintenance and
programming to their portfolios.
Then I analyze the structure of this organizational field: how these organizations interrelate, who funds them,
and what ends they serve. In addition to records and documents, this analysis draws on interviews with a sample
of leaders representing the range of organizations directly involved in the park system, as well as higher-level
organizations that provide them funding and technical assistance. I find an organizational field in flux. The
largest corporate and nonprofit park sponsors, as well as the state’s Department of Natural Resources, have
million-dollar budgets and professional staffs, and they work closely with foundations and city officials, including
the mayor. They usually have full control of the public spaces they support. Smaller organizations are far more
numerous, but few have close working relationships with city officials. Funding is scarce, and only a few
established organizations have received significant grants, primarily for capital expenses like installing new
playgrounds. Most “Friends of” groups have no budget beyond their donated labor. They focus on advocacy and
basic programming: clean ups, nature walks, neighborhood picnics, and protests demanding more investment.

Like early community development organizations, the fate of these different park partners, and the direction they
take the park system, will hinge on whether and how system of supplemental park provision are
institutionalized.
References
 Brecher, Charles and Oliver Wise. 2008. “Looking a Gift Horse in the Mouth: Challenges in Managing
Philanthropic Support for Public Services.” Public Administration Review December: S146-S161.
 Harnik, Peter and Abby Martin. 2015. “Public Spaces/Private Money: The Triumphs and Pitfalls of Urban
Park Conservancies.” Washington, D.C.: The Trust for Public Land.
 Ferguson, Ronald F., and Sara E. Stoutland. 1999. Reconceiving the Community Development Field. In
Urban problems and community development, edited by R. F. Ferguson and W. T. Dickens. Washington,
D.C.: Brookings Institution Press. Pp. 33-77.
 Roy, Parama. 2011. “Non-profit and Community-based Green Space Production in Milwaukee:
Maintaining a Counter-weight within Neo-liberal Urban environment Governance.” Space and Polity.
15(2): 87-105.
 Yin, Jordan S. 1998. “The Community Development Industry System: A Case Study of Politics and
Institutions in Cleveland, 1967-1997.” Journal of Urban Affairs. 20(2): 137-157.

Abstract Index #: 240
A CURRENT INVENTORY OF VACANT URBAN LAND IN AMERICA
Abstract System ID#: 485
Poster
LEE, Ryun Jung [Texas A&M University] ryunjunglee@gmail.com, presenting author
NEWMAN, Galen [Texas A&M University] gnewman@arch.tamu.edu, primary author
Non-productive space is increasing in U.S. city. From 2000 to 2010, the total number of vacant housing units in
America increased by over 4.5 million, an escalation of 44% (Mallach, 2012). There have only been three national
inventories gauging vacant land/abandonment in U.S. urban area. This issue should be of paramount concern as
many city are experiencing decline.
The earliest study conducted was performed in 1963 by John Neidercorn and Edward Hearle in a report titled
‘Recent  land_use Trends in 48 Large American city.’ Results showed, on average, 20.7% of land in American
cities were considered vacant. Ray Northam conducted a similar study in 1971 entitled ’Vacant Urban Land in the
American City.’ The study used similar measures as its predecessor but also used population change as a
measure. On average, city with over 100,000 persons reported around 24.5% of their lands vacant. It was also
determined that as populations decreased in city, vacant land amounts tended to increase. The most current
attempt was a survey distributed in 1998 by Ann Bowman and Michael Pagano. The resultant book, Terra
Incognita, was published in 2004 while its precursor article ‘Vacant Land in city: An Urban Resource,’ was
published in 2001. Their population was also city with populations over 100,000 persons. It also assessed
abandoned structure amounts. An average of 15.4% of each city surveyed was reported to be vacant with a mean
of 2.7 abandoned structures per 1000 persons.
The purpose of this study was to gather a current inventory of vacant land/abandonment in the urban U.S.,
examine vacant land trends by region, and compare results to previous surveys. Land area change per city/region,
population changes, and vacant addresses were also used as measures. An online survey was distributed to all
U.S. city with 100,000 or more population in the U.S. (215 in total) from Fall 2013 to Summer 2014. The study
had a 58% response rate (124 in total) with 79 city having available vacant land data. The survey gathered data
on the amount, types, characteristics, and designation of vacant land/vacant addresses. Because the data
examining abandoned structures in preceding studies was highly estimated, this study used United States Postal
Services (USPS) data on vacant addresses collected from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development to assess abandonment. Therefore, all 124 responding city could be evaluated in regards to
abandoned structures, but on 79 on vacant land.

Findings show an average of 16.7% of civic area is considered vacant land nationally, with around 10,350 acres of
vacant land per city. Overall, the ratio of vacant land to city size has increased by 1.3% since 1998 but decreased
by 3% since 1963. Vacant land tended to vary by region; city with higher amounts of vacant land tended to
report lower amounts of vacant addresses, and vice versa. For example, Midwestern and Northeastern city
reported more vacant addresses (abandoned structures) while Southern city report higher vacant land.
Surprisingly, populating city with elastic boundaries reported higher levels of vacant land than did depopulating
ones. Shrinking city, particularly in the Midwest, reported the highest rate of abandonment, overtaking the
Northeast who reported the highest abandonment rates in 1998.
Vacant structure determination varied by city with duration of vacancy and resident feedback being the most
common method to designate a lot/structure as vacant. city also reported that most vacant parcels in U.S. city
are small, odd shaped, and disconnected, making them difficult to regenerate. Disinvestment, suburbanization
and annexation were the primary causes of vacant land increase while policy reform, population in-migrations
and growing local economies tend to help decrease amounts.
References
 Mallach, A. (2012). Laying the Groundwork for Change: Demolition, urban strategy, and policy reform.
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Metropolitan Policy Program. Retrieved October, 11, 2012.
 Bowman, A. O. M., & Pagano, M. A. (2004). Terra incognita: Vacant land and urban strategies:
Georgetown University Press.
 Bowman, A. O. M., & Pagano, M. A. (2000). Transforming America's city: policy and Conditions of
Vacant Land. Urban Affairs Review, 35(4), 559-581. doi: 10.1177/10780870022184534
 Niedercorn, J. H., & Hearle, E. F. (1964). Recent land-use trends in forty-eight large American city. Land
Economics, 105-110.
 Northam, R. M. (1971). Vacant urban land in the American city. Land Economics, 345-355.

Abstract Index #: 241
IMPEDIMENTS TO IMPLEMENTING MIXED-INCOME HOUSING PLANS IN CHICAGO
Abstract System ID#: 374
Pre-organized Session: High Hopes vs. Reality in Public Housing Reforms
JACKSON, April [University of Illinois at Chicago] ajacks29@uic.edu
The HOPE VI program from 1993-2010 has funded 262 HOPE VI Revitalization Grants to public housing
authorities, which facilitated tearing down distressed public housing and replacing high-rise development with
mixed-income housing. More specifically, the HOPE VI program marries subsidy policy with new urbanist design
principles to guide the development of mixed income, mixed density comminuty. While some mixed-income
developments are recognized nationally as best practice models, research indicates that mixed-income
developments have varying degrees in which new urbanism and income mixing strategies are implemented
(Smith, 2002; Vale, 2002). I suggest that differences in implementation found in HOPE VI developments trace
back to changes in local actors’ level of commitment to plans for social and physical mixing strategies. Research
on plan implementation and mixed-income developments assumes that consensus among stakeholders,
financing, local housing market conditions, legal parameters, and political support influence the implementation
of project plans (Dalton & Burby, 1994; Talen, 1996; Laurian et al, 2004; Turbov & Piper, 2005). This research asks
what other constraints exist that influence actor commitment and determine whether new urbanism and income
mixing strategies are implemented in HOPE VI projects?
This paper examines this question through a comparative case study of three HOPE VI planning efforts in Chicago
that exhibit different outcomes. Despite being located in close proximity to each other, receiving comparable
levels of funding, a simultaneous development timeframe, and overlapping actors, the implementation of these
three projects vary widely: Westhaven Park is considered a nationally recognized model for public housing
redevelopment, Roosevelt Square is led by a high profile team and significant community investment, but

remains largely unbuilt, and Jackson Square has been widely considered a disappointment by many involved in
the project. This qualitative research uses 43 in-depth interviews with actors involved in the development
process, as well as original documents to identify the implementation barriers that constrain local actors
commitment to implement physical and social mixing strategies. I describe phases of development, which
illustrate where and how barriers to implementation arise that influence actor decisions. I argue that the
implementation of new urbanism is further constrained by 5 factors: planned development process, site
constraints, community buy-in, accountability measures, and developer capacity. Overall, the implications of my
research offer lessons learned and approaches for policy makers and practitioners to use to work more
effectively within these constraints to implement new urbanism and income mixing strategies in future HOPE VI
projects still underway.
References
 Dalton, L., & Burby, R. (1994). Mandates, plans and planners: building local commitment to development
management. Journal of the American Planning Association, 60 (4), pg 444-461.
 Laurian, L., Day, M., Berke, P., Ericksen, N., Backhurst, M., Crawford, J., & Dixon, J. (in press). 2004. What
drives plan implementation? Plans, planning agencies and developers. Journal of environment
Planning and Management. Vol 47, Issue 4, pg 555-577
 Smith, Janet. (2002). HOPE VI and New Urbanism: Eliminating Low-Income Housing to Make MixedIncome comminuty. Planners Network, (151): 22-25.
 Talen, Emily. 1996. Do Plans Get Implemented? A Review of Evaluation in Planning. Journal of Planning
Literature, 10:248
 Vale, Lawrence. (2002). Reclaiming Public Housing: A Half Century of Struggle in Three Public
Neighborhoods. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Abstract Index #: 242
ASSESSING THE DETERMINANTS OF GENTRIFICATION AND DISPLACEMENT IN THE SF BAY AREA
Abstract System ID#: 377
Pre-organized Session: Disadvantaged and Displaced in California
ZUK, Miriam [University of California, Berkeley] mzuk@berkeley.edu, presenting author, primary author
CHAPPLE, Karen [University of California, Berkeley] chapple@berkeley.edu
As regions across country plan for and invest in Transit Oriented Development, comminuty are increasingly
concerned about how new transit investment and related new development around transit stations will affect
the lives of existing residents, particularly low-income comminuty of color (Rayle 2014). Locals are likely to
benefit from improved mobility, neighborhood revitalization, lower transportation costs, and other amenities
that spill over from the new development (Cervero 2004). However, more disadvantaged comminuty may fail to
benefit, if the new development does not bring accessible housing and job opportunities, or if there is
gentrification that displaces low-income and/or minority residents (Pollack, Bluestone, and Billingham 2010;
Chapple 2009).
Using the case of the San Francisco Bay Area, this paper develops an innovative approach to understand and
analyzing neighborhood change and displacement as it relates to transit oriented development. We draw from a
multi-year research project which offers several methodological innovations. First, we develop a multi-level
regional database, from the parcel to the tract to the city level, to better understand the role of property
investment and turnover at a very local level, as well as the impact of city policy and regulations. Second, new
metrics of gentrification and displacement are developed through community-engaged participatory research in
nine geographically representative case study neighborhood across the San Francisco Bay Area. Third, statistical
analysis is conducted to assess the drivers and restraints to neighborhood change and displacement. Fourth, a
ground-truthing methodology is developed and applied to validate the inputs and results of the analysis.
In this paper, we present results from three sets of data and analyses: 1) census-tract level analyses of social and
physical neighborhood characteristics, 2) parcel level analysis of public and private investments, and 3) ground-

truthing analysis. Comparing the results of this analysis to previous research we find that academic research
(Freeman 2005) is significantly under-estimating the displacement phenomenon and we propose a series of
metrics to correct these errors. We furthermore assess the  impact of anti-displacement policy as well as the
timing and scale of change. This new methodology for estimating displacement could significantly improve the
ways that academics and practitioners understand and mitigate the  impact of planning and development on low
income neighborhood and comminuty of color.
References
 Cervero, Robert. 2004. Transit-Oriented Development in the United States: Experiences, Challenges, and
Prospects. Vol. 102. Transportation Research Board.
 Chapple, Karen. 2009. Mapping Susceptibility to Gentrification: The Early Warning Toolkit. Berkeley, CA:
Center for Community Innovation.
 Freeman, Lance. 2005. “Displacement or Succession? Residential Mobility in Gentrifying
Neighborhoods.” Urban Affairs Review 40 (4): 463–91.
 Pollack, Stephanie, Barry Bluestone, and Chase Billingham. 2010. Maintaining Diversity In America’s
Transit-Rich neighborhood: Tools for Equitable Neighborhood Change. Dukakis Center for Urban and
Regional Policy.
 Rayle, Lisa. 2014. “Investigating the Connection Between Transit-Oriented Development and
Displacement: Four Hypotheses.” Housing Policy Debate 0 (0): 1–18.

Abstract Index #: 243
HOUSING, HOUSEHOLD, AND ENERGY USE: REVEALING THE ROLE OF HOUSING CHOICE IN DETERMINING
RESIDENTIAL ENERGY CONSUMPTION
Abstract System ID#: 380
Individual Paper
ESTIRI, Hossein [University of Washington] hestiri@uw.edu
Policies in place today have yet to achieve the level of greenhouse gas reduction necessary to stabilize our
changing climate (Drummond 2010; Boswell, Greve & Seale 2010). One relatively untapped opportunity for
planners to reduce emissions is in the residential sector, a sector responsible for 22 percent of the energy
consumed in the US, and 21 percent of CO2 emissions (US Energy Information Administration 2013). Yet, this
sector has been overlooked in the general energy debate (Swan & Ugursal 2009), and dismissed in planning
scholarship. Instead, planning research has devoted considerable attention to the transportation sector (Ewing & Rong
2008) or to improving energy efficiency of the buildings and appliances (Brounen, Kok, & Quigley 2012; Kavgic et
al. 2010; Kriström 2006; Lutzenhiser 2014). This paper incorporates housing policy into energy policy, to provide
new opportunities for planners to participate in residential energy policy.
Household and housing unit characteristics both directly determine a significant proportion of energy consumed
in residential buildings. Households also determine the housing unit characteristics and therefore can have an
indirect affect energy use through their effect on the characteristics of the housing unit (Ewing & Rong 2008;
Steemers & Yun 2009). In this research, I characterize such indirect effects as housing choice effects on energy
consumption. This research untangles the direct and indirect effects of household and housing variables on
residential energy consumption to reveal the role of housing choice in residential energy consumption.
Using data from the 2009 US Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS 2009), I applied Structural Equation
Modeling to estimate the effect of housing choice on per-capita energy consumption. The RECS is a national
sample survey conducted by the US EIA that collects energy, housing, and household related data. The 2009
microdata contains information from 12,083 households selected at random using a complex multistage area
probability sampling design.
Results show that housing choice effects play a predominant role in residential energy consumption, constituting
more than 80 percent of households’ indirect effect on energy consumption. Such a significant housing choice

effect on residential energy consumption provides remarkable opportunities for planners to incorporate housing
policy into energy policy. Planners can participate in residential energy management efforts by influencing
housing needs and priorities of comminuty towards more sustainable compact housing units. In comparison to
studies based on ordinary regression models, results of this research suggest that the indirect effects of many
household characteristics on energy consumption are much larger than anticipated. Furthermore, this statistical
method may prove useful for researching multiple seemingly intractable research questions of interest in
planning research.
References
 Ewing, R., & Rong, F. (2008). The impact of urban form on U.S. residential energy use. Housing Policy
Debate, 19(1), 1–30. doi:10.1080/10511482.2008.9521624
 Kelly, S. (2011). Do homes that are more energy efficient consume less energy?: A structural equation
model of the English residential sector. Energy, 36(9), 5610–5620. doi:10.1016/j.energy.2011.07.009
 Drummond, W. J. (2010). Statehouse Versus Greenhouse. Journal of the American Planning Association,
76(4), 413–433. doi:10.1080/01944363.2010.499537
 Steemers, K., & Yun, G. Y. (2009). Household energy consumption: a study of the role of occupants.
Building Research & Information, 37(5-6), 625–637. doi:10.1080/09613210903186661
 Boswell, M. R., Greve, A. I., & Seale, T. L. (2010). An Assessment of the Link Between Greenhouse Gas
Emissions Inventories and Climate Action Plans. Journal of the American Planning Association, 76(4),
451–462. doi:10.1080/01944363.2010.503313

Abstract Index #: 244
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN A PROJECT-BASED RENTAL SUBSIDY ENDS? MOBILITY AND ACADEMIC OUTCOMES
Abstract System ID#: 383
Individual Paper
REINA, Vincent [University of Southern California] vreina@usc.edu
The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) financed roughly 850,000 units of housing
through the project-based Section 8 program. In Los Angeles the project-based Section 8 subsidy already ended
on 330 properties containing over 18,000 units. Nationally, there are over 3,000 properties, contacting over
150,000 units, where the project-based Section 8 subsidy ended. The number of tenants affected by a subsidy
ending will only increase going forward because almost all rental units developed with a federal rental subsidy
since the 1970s are owned by private entities that agreed to maintain their property as affordable for a fixed
period of time. For example, there are over 50,000 units in properties in Los Angeles alone where an owner is
eligible to leave a rental subsidy program, or will be eligible to do so in the near future. This paper identifies the
impact that this event, and mobility more broadly, has on the academic outcomes of the youth who live in these
properties.
The decision to end a project-based Section 8 contract is an exogenous shock to tenants who live in the property
because HUD or the owner, not the household, makes the decision to end the contract. This event increases a
household’s probability of moving and such housing instability may have negative consequences. One such
consequence is poorer academic outcomes for the youth who live in these properties. This paper examines the
relationship between mobility and outcomes using detailed building-level data for all subsidized properties,
including those where a rental subsidy ended, and confidential student-level data provided by the Los Angeles
Unified School District (LAUSD) between 2000 and 2014.
This paper provides an estimate of the impact that the end of a project-based rental subsidy has on the welfare
of the households in these properties. Such knowledge improves planners’ understanding of the costs and
benefits of preserving place-based subsidies, and whether existing policy tools provide effective safety nets. This
paper also estimates the impact of mobility on academic outcomes more broadly, which is important as planners
develop tools to decrease the negative affects of housing instability on low-income households.

References
 Briggs, X. D. 1997. Moving up versus moving out: Neighborhood effects in housing mobility program.
Housing Policy Debate 8(1): 195-23.
 Eriksen, M.D. and A. Ross. 2013. The impact of housing vouchers on mobility and neighborhood
attributes. Real Estate Economics, 41(2): pp. 255–277.
 Olsen, E.O. 2003. Should the Housing Voucher Program Be Converted to a Block Grant? Housing Policy
Debate, 14: 283-293.
 Rumberger, R. W., and K.A. Larson. 1998. Student mobility and the increased risk of high school dropout.
American Journal of Education, 107(1): 1-35.
 South, S., Haynie, D. L., and S. Bose. 2007. Student mobility and school dropout. Social Science Research,
36 (1): 68-94.

Abstract Index #: 245
WHICH city OFFER HOUSING CHOICE VOUCHER HOUSEHOLDS THE BEST ACCESS TO LOW-DISTRESS
NEIGHBORHOODS?
Abstract System ID#: 395
Individual Paper
MCCLURE, Kirk [University of Kansas] mcclure@ku.edu, presenting author
SCHWARTZ, Alex [The New School] schwartz@newschool.edu
Background: The Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) program is the nation’s largest housing assistance initiative,
serving over 2.2 million households. The program offers choice to the participating households in that they can
live in any rental unit they choose, in any neighborhood, if the unit’s condition is sound and the rent is
reasonable. The program was expected to break down the barriers that keep the poor and minorities from
gaining access to neighborhood with low levels of distress. The expectations did not materialize.
Prior work: This paper extends the authors’ prior work on the influence of race upon the availability of rental
units with rents sufficiently low that they are eligible for program use and with locations in neighborhood in low
levels of distress. They found that racial and ethnic minority HCV households have few opportunities to locate in
low-distress neighborhood unless they locate in predominantly white or well integrated tracts (Schwartz and
McClure, 2013). Pendall (2000) found that HCV households tend to spatially concentrate and that the level of
concentration hinges on race. When assisted households are mostly black and other residents are mostly white,
assisted households are much more likely to live in distressed tracts. McClure (2010) found that non-Hispanic
white HCV households are able to enter low-poverty neighborhood (a proxy for low-distress neighborhood) at a
rate greater than the availability of affordable units, whereas minorities are not. McClure, Schwartz and Taghavi
(2014) found that, within large metropolitan area, minorities located in low-poverty tracts less frequently than
non-Hispanics whites, and that the pattern has not changed much over time.
Research questions: Building on this work, this paper will explore which metropolitan area offer HCV households
the best access to low-distress neighborhood. It will seek to identify the characteristics that distinguish the
markets with high HCV entry into low-distress neighborhood from those with low entry.
Methods and data: The research reported here merges data on HCV households by race and ethnicity with
American Community Survey data at the census tract level. The tracts are aggregated to the level of
metropolitan area. The metropolitan area are examined for variation in the availability of low-distress tracts by
the racial composition of the tracts as well as the entry of low-distress tracts by HCV households by race and
ethnicity.
Policy Implications: This research should help to guide future efforts at economic and racial integration using
vouchers as a relocation resource.

References
 McClure, Kirk. 2010. The Prospects for Guiding Housing Choice Voucher Households to High-Opportunity
Neighborhoods, Cityscape 12(3): 101-122.
 McClure, Kirk, Alex Schwartz, and Lydia B. Taghavi. 2014. Housing Choice Voucher Location Patterns a
Decade Later, Housing Policy Debate, forthcoming.
 Pendall, Rolf. 2000. “Why voucher and certificate users live in distressed neighborhood,” Housing Policy
Debate 11(4): 881-910.
 Schwartz, Alex and Kirk McClure. 2013. The Impact of Race and Ethnicity on Entry to High-Opportunity
Neighborhoods Among Housing Choice Voucher Recipients. Unpublished paper presented at the annual
conference of the Urban Affairs Association, San Francisco.

Abstract Index #: 246
THE U.S. HOUSING FINANCE DEBATE: IMPLICATIONS FOR URBAN FAMILIES, neighborhood AND city
Abstract System ID#: 396
Individual Paper
IMMERGLUCK, Dan [Georgia Tech] dan.immergluck@coa.gatech.edu
Since Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were placed in federal conservatorship in 2008, there have been several
rounds of policy debate over reforming the basic funding structure for U.S. mortgage markets. This paper will
engage in this debate. I will start by discussing why housing finance is important to families and neighborhood in
the U.S. I will reframe the “homeownership versus rental” debate into one about how to provide the best
housing opportunities to moderate and middle-income households and neighborhood, and the role of housing
finance in that process. Rather than oversimplify the debate into an “ownership is better” versus “renting is
better” dichotomy, I examine the legal, economic and spatial context of housing tenure and focus on goals of
maintaining affordable and sustainable homeownership options while also supporting affordable rental
alternatives.
The paper will then delve into the impact that housing finance can have on affordable homeownership, and on
neighborhoods and city. To help inform the debate over the future federal role in housing markets, I will review
the historical development of mortgage markets in the U.S. since the early twentieth century and the importance
of a federal role in maintaining stable and sound markets. I will then turn to the current debate over the future of
housing finance, reviewing some of the primary proposals that have been put forth from the perspective of what
consequences they would likely have on urban families, neighborhood, and city. I will also describe a proposal
that has received short shrift in the policy debate.
References
 Goodman, L. 2014. “Housing Finance Reform: A Realistic Assessment.” Paper Presented at Lincoln
Institute of Land Policy’s Annual Conference. Cambridge, MA. June 2.
 Herbert, C., D. McCue, and R. Sanchez-Moyano. 2013. “Is Homeownership Still and Effective Means of
Building Wealth for Low-Income and Minority Households? (Was it Ever?)” HBTL-06. September.
Cambridge, MA: Joint Center for Housing Studies at Harvard University.

Abstract Index #: 247
WHERE THE OTHER HALF LIVES: MIGRANT AND SEASONAL FARMWORKER'S HOUSING LOCATION PATTERNS OF
EASTERN NORTH CAROLINA
Abstract System ID#: 397
Individual Paper
HUR, Misun [East Carolina University] hurmi@ecu.edu, presenting author, primary author
BELLAMY, Roberta [East Carolina University] BELLAMYR08@students.ecu.edu
LIMON, Francisco [East Carolina University] limonf13@students.ecu.edu

PERALTA, Juvencio [Association of Mexicans in North Carolina] juvenciorp@amexcannc.org
Farmworkers in North Carolina are among the most underserved residents in the state. Heavily relied on migrant
and seasonal farmworkers, farmers offer housings for workers as part of compensation. However, the housing
conditions are seriously substandard – even frequently called “camps” rather than housings – intensifying
hardships to the farmworkers and their families.
Research on marginalized groups’ housing is rich but little research has been done on farmworkers’ housing.
Recently, there has been a series of research by a research team at Wake Forest Medical School focusing on
farmworkers’ housing conditions (Early et al., 2006), regulation violations (Arcury et al., 2012), housing quality
and individual health (Quandt et al., 2013). However, none of them looked at the geographic locations of the
migrant and seasonal farmworker housings with an environment and social justice perspective. Montz, Allen,
and Monitz (2011) and Gares and Montz (2014) would be the only two research studies considering the
farmworkers’ housing locations related to their vulnerability in the case of natural disasters. Even under the
limited data availability – an underrepresentation of both the numbers of workers and of farms that use this
source of labor – their findings show a compelling need for emergency management for farmworkers.
The North Carolina Migrant Housing Act sets standards for the farmworker campsite but they are bare minimum
addressing only three aspects—separations from standing water, separations from any area where livestock is
kept, and the cleanliness of the site. Our research proposes a hypothesis: the minimal regulatory requirements of
the farmworker campsite results in undesirable location patterns for housing. We seek to answer this research
question: If undesirable campsite location patterns exist, what factors contribute?
The primary data is retrieved from the migrant and seasonal farmworkers’ health screen data at the Kinston
Community Health Center (KCHC), Lenoir County, North Carolina. This research only utilizes the camp locations
and farmworkers’ basic demographic characteristics from the raw data limited to eastern North Carolina counties
where there are concentrated migrant and seasonal farmworkers. We first identify farmworker camp locations
and develop the profiles of farmworkers and the camps in eastern North Carolina. We then perform the
geospatial analysis of farmworker camps using ArcGIS. Several spatial characteristics are considered, which
include accessibility to main road/highway, accessibility to basic services, distance to other farmworker camps
nearby, floodplain, as well as distance to the body of standing water and distance to where livestock are kept.
Demographic and housing characteristics are also included such as the legal status and age of the farmworker,
density and the type of camps (male-only, female-only or family camp).
The preliminary data show the patterns of farmworker campsite depending on the spatial distributions and
housing characteristics of camps and demographic characteristics of the farmworkers. Our findings confirm that
farmworker housings are located at environmently vulnerable and socially isolated locations.
UN Commission on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights states that every adult and child has the right to live in
housing that does not compromise their health or well-being. Due to the legal status, job security, cultural
unfamiliarity, and language barrier, farmworkers tolerate the underprivileged housing conditions and poor
quality of life. Although we only focused on the geospatial relations of campsite with other physical
environmental features in this research, we could see the problems are much bigger than just a structure. The
inadequate living conditions may stem serious mental and physical health problems to workers. Further research
on housing-related workers’ quality of life and health issues is needed.
References
 Arcury, T.A., Weir, M., Chen, H., Summers, P., Pelletier, L.E., Galvan, L., Bischoff, W.E., Mirabelli, M.C., &
Quandt, S.A. (2012). Migrant farmworker housing regulation violations in North Carolina. American
Journal of Industrial Medicine, 55, 191-204.
 Early, J., Davis, S.W., Quandt, S.A., Rao, P., Snively, B.M., & Arcury, T.A. (2006). Housing characteristics of
farmworker families in North Carolina. Journal of Immigrant and Minority Health, 8(2), 173-184.
 Gares, C.E., & Montz, B.E. (2014). Disaster vulnerability of migrant and seasonal farmworkers: A
comparison of Texas and North Carolina. Southeastern Geographer, 54(1), 36-54.
 Montz, B.E., Allen, T.R., & Monitz, G.I. (2011). Systemic trends in disaster vulnerability: Migrant and
seasonal farm workers in North Carolina. Risk, Hazards & Crisis in Public Policy, 2, 1-17.



Quandt, S.A., Wiggins, M.F., Chen, H., Bischoff, W.E., & Arcury, T.A. (2013). Heat index in migrant
farmworker housing: Implications for rest and recovery from work-related heat stress. American Journal
of Public Health, 203(8), e24-e26.

Abstract Index #: 248
URBAN DECLINE, FISCAL CAPACITY, AND SERVICE DEMAND: THE IMPACT OF POPULATION LOSS ON LARGE
AMERICAN city, 1980-2010.
Abstract System ID#: 400
Individual Paper
KUHLMANN, Daniel [Cornell University] dok23@cornell.edu, presenting author
MANVILLE, Michael [Cornell University] mkm253@cornell.edu, primary author
Do city in decline lose the ability to finance themselves? We use a panel of 110 large American city to examine
the relationship between population decline, local fiscal capacity, demand for municipal services, demographic
changes, and economic conditions. We find that the demographic, fiscal, and economic conditions in declining
cities differ significantly from those with growing populations. Furthermore, we find evidence that the
relationship between growth, fiscal capacity, and service demand is not linear across our entire sample. Rather,
our findings suggest that both population decline and fast growth can result in reduced fiscal capacity and
increased service demand. Finally, we find evidence of endogeneity in the relationship between population
change, fiscal capacity, and service demand.
We create a panel dataset from the US Census Bureau, the Lincoln Institute's Fiscally Standardized city dataset,
the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Using these data, we
create a standardized measure of fiscal capacity that holds constant actual tax effort of individual municipalities.
This measure allows us to compare the underlying fiscal capacity of city, based solely on differences in their
economic bases. We also create a comparable measure of municipal service demand using factor analysis on a
matrix of poverty, crime, income, and climate variation variables.
From our descriptive analysis, we find that city facing population loss are more likely to experience increased
poverty, slower declines in crime rates, and declines in racial diversity. Our regression results, estimated through
a series of simultaneous equations, show that there is an endogenous relationship between population change,
fiscal capacity, and service demand. Furthermore, we find that both decline and fast growth can result in fiscal
challenges for city. In sum, our findings are consistent with the idea that as city lose population they have
greater demand for municipal services and less fiscal capacity to meet those needs.
References
 Rappaport, Jordan. "US urban decline and growth, 1950 to 2000." Economic Review-Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City 88.3 (2003): 15-44.
 Boustan, Leah, and Allison Shertzer. "Population trends as a counterweight to central city decline, 1950–
2000." Demography 50.1 (2013): 125-147.
 Hollander, Justin B., and Jeremy Németh. "The bounds of smart decline: a foundational theory for
planning shrinking city." Housing Policy Debate 21.3 (2011): 349-367.
 Downs, Anthony. "The challenge of our declining big city." Housing Policy Debate 8.2 (1997): 359-408.

Abstract Index #: 249
A CHECK-IN WITH PARENTS TWO YEARS LATER ON THE BENEFITS AND CHALLENGES OF SCHOOL CHOICE
POLICIES
Abstract System ID#: 402
Pre-organized Session: Considering Schools in Community Development
MAKAREWICZ, Carrie [University of Colorado Denver] carrie.makarewicz@ucdenver.edu

Since the 1960s, urban public schools have been experimental testing grounds for improving student outcomes.
However, most of these program have struggled to show better student outcomes, particularly in lower income
communities. Reform program are often based on business models or theories that do not account for the
unique aspects of delivering an education; acknowledge the other supports students need to learn, such as stable
housing, and outside-of-school activities; or recognize the complex school and community resources needed to
implement school changes. The school choice and competition reform movement represents these types of
assumptions: 1) creating school choice will create competition, thereby allowing the best schools, i.e. firms, to
survive, which will automatically translate to better student outcomes; 2) if only students were permitted to do
so, they could easily select and access better schools; and 3) competition alone is enough, even without the other
systems and supports.
This longitudinal study of 40 families in Oakland, California tests the theory of school choice as a method for
creating greater opportunities. Parents were interviewed through semi-structured, in-person interviews in the
first interview, and by phone, two years later. They were asked about their school choices, how the choice
interacted with their other daily activities and basic needs, and the types of opportunities and activities their
children had at the selected school and elsewhere. The 40 cases provide a range of school choice examples and
outcomes, with the added dimension of time. Background on the Oakland Unified School District and individual
school performance was generated through participant observation of school and neighborhood meetings, data
analysis, interviews with professionals, and content analysis.
The first round of interviews indicated that the increased distance necessary to exercise school choice often
constrained parents’ time and money for engaging at school and accessing other youth and adult opportunities.
The opposite was true for most families utilizing their neighborhood school. The initial study also confirmed that
low-income families are more likely to select schools for practical reasons or based on limited information. The
second wave of interviews provided more detailed explanations on why the benefits of school choice have been
difficult to realize at the school and household levels. As parents manage changing relationships, housing and
work situations, their health, and their children’s other developmental needs, maintaining a daily travel schedule
to a distant school, where the parent and child are generally not part of the immediate community, can be very
challenging. From the school’s perspective, it can be difficult to build a “school-community” when students and
their families are not connected outside of school. The longitudinal approach of this study also provides
additional observations to test school performance in light of increased competition, as well as neighborhood
impact. Combined, the school and interview data suggests that the current unplanned approach to school choice
is not achieving the desired benefits. While the ability to choose another school has been important for students
with special needs or different learning styles, and for families who move, promoting choice through
competition, often at the expense of neighborhood schools, may be damaging in the short and long run, to
families, school districts, and neighborhood. The end result is little improvement in opportunities for students.
This study highlights the gaps between school-choice theory and implementation due to the lack of consideration
for household resources and structure, time-space constraints, and school-community connections. The results
emphasize the need for school and urban planners to work together on school policy with spatial ramifications.
This type of collaboration may lead to multi-disciplinary solutions that support the whole child and the diversity
of family needs, ultimately leading to better student outcomes and better neighborhood schools.
References
 Bifulco, Robert, and Helen F. Ladd. "School Choice, Racial Segregation, and Test-Score Gaps: Evidence
from North Carolina's Charter School Program*." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 26, no. 1
(2007): 31-56.
 Duncan, Greg J, and Richard J Murnane. Whither Opportunity?: Rising Inequality, Schools, and Children's
Life Chances. Russell Sage Foundation Publications, 2011.
 Ravitch, Diane. Reign of Error: The Hoax of the Privatization Movement and the Danger to America's
Public Schools. Random House Digital, Inc., 2013.
 Dryfoos, Joy G. "Full-Service Community Schools: A Strategy - not a Program." New Directions for Youth
Development 2005, no. 107 (2005): 7-14.



Jarvis, H. "Moving to London Time Household Co-Ordination and the Infrastructure of Everyday Life."
Time & Society 14, no. 1 (2005): 133-54.

Abstract Index #: 250
POWER PLAYS, STRUGGLES, AND CONSEQUENCES: URBAN REDEVELOPMENT IN ISTANBUL
Abstract System ID#: 417
Individual Paper
AKCAKAYA, Imge [University of California, Los Angeles] akcakaya@ucla.edu
This study examines how local power structures have influenced the politics of planning and decision-making in
urban redevelopment projects in Istanbul. The theoretical motive for choosing this topic stems from the small
number of thorough examinations of the reality of power structures in planning practice relative to its recognized
importance. Arnstein’s 1969 article, A Ladder of Citizen Participation, is undoubtedly one of the most prominent
works to deal with participatory approaches to planning history. Since then, although there have been numerous
studies, models and methods developed regarding community participation, the planning literature seems to be
rather sparse when it comes to the power structures and the interaction of “haves” and “have-nots,” terms
which Arnstein notably used to define participation in her work, and how these affect development. In fact,
unlike political science and sociology, which have examined societal power relations extensively, the field of
planning generally lacks a body of central scholarly work that places the discourse at its core.
Examination of the wide array of questions surrounding planning, power, and politics and the challenges of
participatory planning in the context of Istanbul may prove rewarding: on the one hand, as in most developing
nations, democracy has not been fully institutionalized in Turkey. Pluralistic and participatory planning processes
face significant obstacles there, such as excessively top-down traditions, inflexibility on the part of the public
sector in establishing public-private partnerships, absence of measures to encourage meaningful citizen
participation, and tendency of elite groups to influence public agencies for their own benefit. On the other hand,
since the major consequences of the Marmara earthquakes of 1999, there has been an increasing demand by the
public for safer and more resilient settlements in Istanbul that could mitigate the effects of a future major
earthquake.
Based on the above problems and motives, the study seeks answers to the following research questions: What
have been the strategies and processes of urban redevelopment in Istanbul? What are the power relationships
among different actors and how do they influence urban redevelopment schemes? To what extent has the
affected community influenced the process of urban redevelopment? To address these questions, I conducted indepth interviews with 25 well-informed senior stakeholders from different groups who influenced the decisionmaking of two pioneering redevelopment projects of Istanbul: planners, local and central government officials,
residents (homeowners and tenants), local businesses, community advocates, and planning faculty of local
universities. Supporting secondary data involve archival documents such as physical and socio-economic analyses
of case area, project contracts, maps, plans, reports and media accounts. A distinguishing contribution of the
study is that it uses fieldwork to compare and contrast the power dynamics of two distinctly different case area;
one that did not entail population displacement; and another where all residents were displaced. Preliminary
findings have revealed that the involvement and influence of stakeholders in the two case area were framed by
the existing national legislative and political setting that generally prevails in centralized governmental structures
and ignores or weakens local community involvement and less powerful actors. Nevertheless, the two cases also
showed differences in the level of community participation and had different outcomes in regards to population
displacement. Overall, lessons from this study would be important for planners and policymakers for addressing
challenges in local redevelopment projects, and for creating planning processes which incorporate community
participation and input.
References
 Flyvbjerg, B. (1998). Rationality and power: Democracy in practice. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.






Forester, J. (1989). Planning in the face of power. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Moulaert, F., & Cabaret, K. (2006). Planning, networks and power relations: Is democratic planning
under capitalism possible? Planning Theory, 5(1), 51-70.
Albrechts, L. (2003). Planning and power: towards an emancipatory approach. Environment and Planning
C: Government and Policy, 21, 905-924.
Healey, P. (1997). Collaborative planning: Shaping places in fragmented societies. London: Macmillan.

Abstract Index #: 251
THE INFLUENCE OF DIVERGENT TEMPORAL FRAMES ON PARTICIPATORY PLANNING: THE CASE OF SCHOOL
CLOSURES IN PHILADELPHIA
Abstract System ID#: 421
Pre-organized Session: Considering Schools in Community Development
BIERBAUM, Ariel [University of California, Berkeley] arielb@berkeley.edu
In 2013, the School District of Philadelphia closed 24 of its 242 traditional public schools, displacing thousands of
students, changing the physical and social fabric of neighborhood, and transforming access to opportunity for
families across the city. Educational leaders argued that declining enrollments and underutilization of school
buildings, deepening budget cuts, and poor performance required them to close schools. They claimed that
closures and student reassignments would provide necessary cost-savings and improve educational outcomes. At
public hearings, this action was met with vehement community opposition; parents and neighborhood residents
argued that closures would negatively impact students and families and that redevelopment of school buildings
would exacerbate development pressures in neighborhood. In this paper, I present an in-depth case study of
Philadelphia’s Point Breeze neighborhood to answer the question: How do individuals (residents and professional
planners or policymakers) understand and experience school closure in relationship to broader urban changes,
such as disinvestment and gentrification? Inspired by educational researchers who emphasize the need to
understand the broader contextual factors (e.g., poverty and segregation) that influence educational system
(Anyon 1997) and drawing on interdisciplinary work on “geographies of opportunity” (Squires & Kubrin 2005), I
argue that school closures not only serve as an education reform strategy, but also as an urban policy that shapes
patterns of development and opportunity across city. The extreme case of school closures reveals the multifold
ways that public education provision is deeply embedded in planning issues – public participation; infrastructure
investment and asset management; neighborhood amenities, stability and change; and metropolitan opportunity
structures. Using frame analysis, I present findings from 51 formal and informal interviews with a combination of
neighborhood residents; developers; and professionals from the school district, city government, citywide and
neighborhood non-profits, and policy think tanks conducted in Fall 2014. Utilizing frame analysis allows me to
uncover the complexity – and often incoherence – between multiple and sometimes competing understandings
of the complex school closure process (Goffman 1974; Schon & Rein 1995). Specifically, I draw on and complicate
Lynch’s dichotomous articulation of the ways that the “imitators and regulators of [environmental] change,” and
those that must endure these changes each maintain a different image of time (1972 p. 3). Lynch argues that
these images of time affect planning and development. In his research, “initiators and regulators” maintain a
more abstracted and longer-term vision of urban development, while residents define a future based on a
shorter-term, more “concrete and particular” sense of time that is based on their daily activities (Lynch 1972: 19).
My analysis in Philadelphia also shows that divergent temporal frames contribute to tensions that surround the
closure decision-making processes and subsequent sales and redevelopment of closed school buildings. Unlike
Lynch, my findings do not reveal clear dichotomous lines of residents and professional and highlight the primacy
of the past for many stakeholders. Many individuals ground their concerns in a long historical trajectory, framing
school closures as the latest act in a protracted effort of urban demolition in the name of revitalization – dating
from slum clearance at the turn of the 20th century through blight removal and Urban Renewal in the 1950s.
Others are more focused on present conditions and future predictions, emphasizing fiscal crises and framing
closures as an inevitability that will ultimately yield equity gains for disadvantaged comminuty.
This research reinforces and clarifies the ways in which schools are an important part of urban infrastructure and
neighborhood change. By highlighting the centrality of temporality, I provide new empirical research that
contributes to framing theory and suggest avenues for participatory planning processes.

References
 Anyon, J. (1997). Ghetto Schooling: A Political Economy of Urban Educational Reform. New York:
Teachers College Press.
 Goffman, E. (1974). Frame Analysis: An Essay on the Organization of Experience. New York: Harper &
Row.
 Lynch, K. (1972). What Time Is This Place? Cambridge: MIT Press.
 Schon, D. A., & Rein, M. (1995). Frame Reflection: Toward the Resolution of Intractable Policy
Controversies. Basic Books.
 Squires, G. D., & Kubrin, C. E. (2005). Privileged Places: Race, Uneven Development and the Geography
of Opportunity in Urban America. Urban Studies, 42(1), 47–68.

Abstract Index #: 252
NEIGHBORHOOD TYPOLOGY AND CHANGE IN THREE RAPIDLY GROWING AMERICAN METROPOLITAN area,
1980-2010
Abstract System ID#: 423
Individual Paper
FOOTE, Nathan [University of Texas at San Antonio] nfoote@sbcglobal.net, presenting author, primary author
WALTER, Rebecca [University of Texas at San Antonio] Rebecca.Walter@utsa.edu
Metropolitan area in the United States have grown in importance since 1980. An overwhelming majority, over
80 percent, of Americans lived in a metropolitan area in 2010. Although growth is occurring, there are differences
in the trajectories of metropolitan area. For example, the 100 largest metropolitan area have experienced
different rates of population growth. Further, the growth patterns of individual area have not been consistent
decade to decade (Frey, 2012). While population growth has been uneven in each metropolitan area, there are
regions that have, since 1980, experienced overall rapid population growth. Based on the 2013 Metropolitan
Statistical Area delineations produced by the United States Office of Management and Budget, of those
metropolitan area with a population of over one million in 2010, the top five fastest-growing have each
experienced population growth in excess of 165 percent. These changes have occurred at the same time that
shifts have materialized in the social geography of metropolitan America (Frey, 2012). Given their increasing size
and importance, understanding social changes in these fast-growing metropolitan area has become a topic of
great relevance for urban planners and policymakers.
Social change is complex and includes multiple variables, such as race, income, education level, age,
unemployment, poverty levels, and even housing value (Kitchen & Williams, 2009; Mikelbank, 2011; Wei & Knox,
2014). While there is important information to be gleaned from focusing on one or even several of these
variables, a more comprehensive vision of temporal and spatial social dynamics is needed. Analyzing change in
neighborhood typology over time has emerged as a way to explore multivariate social changes in metropolitan
areas across the United States (Wei & Knox, 2014). Neighborhood typology analysis has also been used to
investigate social change over space and time in a single metropolitan area (Mikelbank, 2011). One suggested
path for further research is to compare neighborhood change in study area that are similar (Mikelbank, 2011).
To do this, a common trait of the potential metropolitan study area would need to be identified.
To date, no study has compared neighborhood typology change over time and space in metropolitan area that
have the common trait of rapid population growth. This project addresses this gap by addressing two research
questions. First, what types of neighborhood have existed in rapidly growing metropolitan area, and how has
the spatial distribution of these neighborhood types changed from decade to decade between 1980 and 2010?
Second, are there similarities between the neighborhood typologies and changes in these growing metropolitan
regions? Potential study area were limited to those Metropolitan Statistical area that had a population of over
one million in 2010. Of these, the three fastest growing metropolitan area in the United States between 1980
and 2010 were Las Vegas-Henderson-Paradise, Nevada; Austin-Round Rock, Texas; and Raleigh, North Carolina.
Principal component analysis (PCA) is used to create a socio-demographic index to examine census tract level

data for these three study area. Then, hierarchical cluster analysis is used to group census tracts that have
similar socio-demographic index scores.
This study advances the existing body of work on neighborhood typology trends by applying the techniques to a
comparative study of metropolitan area with a common trait: rapid growth. Three metropolitan regions which
have not been well-studied or compared are the focus of this research. Additionally, by analyzing social dynamics
through multivariate neighborhood change, this study advances the understanding of how the social dynamics of
metropolitan regions can develop while undergoing rapid population growth. The findings of this research have
important policy implications for long-range urban_planning and the development of limited resources over time.
References
 Frey, W.H. (2012). Population growth in metro American since 1980: Putting the volatile 2000s in
perspective. Report. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, Metropolitan Policy Program.
 Kitchen, P., & Williams, A. (2009). Measuring neighborhood social change in Saskatoon, Canada: A
geographic analysis. Urban Geography, 30(3), 261-288.
 Mikelbank, B.A. (2011). Neighborhood déjà vu: Classification in metropolitan Cleveland, 1970-2000.
Urban Geography, 32(3), 317-333.
 Wei, F., & Knox, P.L. (2014). Neighborhood change in metropolitan America, 1990 to 2010. Urban Affairs
Review, 50(4), 459-489.

Abstract Index #: 253
THE EFFECTS OF PUBLICLY ASSISTED REDEVELOPMENT PROJECTS ON AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN PITTSBURGH'S
EAST LIBERTY NEIGHBORHOOD
Abstract System ID#: 582
Individual Paper
MICKLOW, Amanda [Cornell University] acm325@cornell.edu
Pittsburgh’s transformation from a smog-ridden steel town to one of America’s most livable city is a story often
told. Former steel mills have been transformed into mixed-use developments, factories into high tech office
space, and neighborhood, like East Liberty, are experiencing large-scale revitalization. This paper is part of a
larger dissertation that examines how recent economic development initiatives interact with different
populations to affect processes of neighborhood change. Specifically, this paper analyzes the impact of publicly
assisted redevelopment projects on the provision of affordable housing for low-income residents in Pittsburgh’s
East Liberty neighborhood.
East Liberty, a historically Black neighborhood, was decimated by a large-scale urban renewal project that razed
the area’s commercial and residential center in the 1960s. Massive public housing projects, called the East Mall,
were constructed in the neighborhood to house displaced residents, but ultimately resulted in the concentration
of poverty and ghettoization of the city’s Black population. These housing projects were recently demolished as
part of a neighborhood-wide redevelopment plan, which again resulted in the displacement of low-income
residents. The redevelopment of East Liberty also includes Bakery Square, a LEED-certified, mixed-use
development in a former Nabisco factory that is home to Google’s Pittsburgh office, and high-end retail and
restaurants catering to the new residents of the neighborhood.
This paper employs a mixed-methods approach that combines a difference-in-difference model to analyze the
relationship between redevelopment and housing price, with stakeholder interviews, census and building permit
data, and a content analysis of planning documents.
While this research is on going, preliminary findings indicate that less than fifteen percent of East Mall tenants
reside in newly constructed, mixed-income housing units and that this is largely explained by a deficit of lowincome, and very low-income units. Stakeholder interviews confirm that former East Mall residents were forced
to relocate to older parts of East Liberty or the adjacent neighborhood of Larimer and Garfield. Results from the

difference-in-difference model suggest that housing price in East Liberty has increased due to recent
redevelopment.
This paper contributes to planning practice and scholarship by locating the effects of publicly assisted
redevelopment projects within the context of affordable housing and revitalization efforts in US postindustrial
cities.
References
 Crowley, G. J. (2005). The politics of place: Contentious urban redevelopment in Pittsburgh. University of
Pittsburgh Press.
 De Sousa, C. A., Wu, C., & Westphal, L. M. (2009). Assessing the effect of publicly assisted brownfield
redevelopment on surrounding property values. Economic Development Quarterly, 23(2): 95-110.
 Schwartz, A. E., Ellen, I. G., Voicu, I., & Schill, M. H. (2006). The external effects of place-based subsidized
housing. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 36(6), 679-707.
 Vale, L. J. (2013). Purging the poorest: Public housing and the design politics of twice-cleared
communities. University of Chicago Press.

Abstract Index #: 254
INFORMALITY AS A MODE OF DEURBANIZATION: PROPERTY AND THE SHRINKING CITY
Abstract System ID#: 448
Pre-organized Session: Learning from Detroit
WEBER, Matthew [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] matweber@umich.edu
The literature on urban informality frames it as a “mode of urbanization” -- one of the pathways through which
the growth of urban area occurs (Roy, 2005). In this paper, I posit that urban informality also serves as a mode of
deurbanization – one of the pathways through which undevelopment occurs. As neighborhood empty-out,
poverty concentrates, and property values fall, the legal, economic, social and spatial mechanisms that ordinarily
reproduce formal property ownership break down. Absent appropriate policy interventions, the result is
widespread informal property ownership. People take over land that does not belong to them, live in houses to
which they have no lawful claim, and buy property without getting clear title to it. These informal ownership
arrangements can contribute to the decline of neighborhood but can also make them more accessible and
liveable places. I illustrate this thesis through a qualitative and quantitative assessment of property relations in
Detroit. While informal ownership is readily observable in Detroit, it occurs in circumstances that suggest that it
may be present, to a lesser degree, in declining neighborhood everywhere. In this way, Detroit serves as an
“extreme” case – an unusual circumstance whose study allows researchers to develop a richer, deeper
understanding of hard-to-observe phenomena (Yin, 2009). This research contributes to the literature on
informality in the United States (Ward, 2004), on the evolution of property rights (Merrill, 2002), and on the
distinctive processes through which decline proceeds in shrinking city (Glaeser & Gyourko, 2005).
References
 Glaeser, E. L., & Gyourko, J. (2005). Urban decline and durable housing. Journal of Political Economy,
113(2), 345-375.
 Merrill, T. W. (2002). The Demsetz Thesis and the Evolution of Property Rights. Journal of Legal Studies,
31(June), S331-338.
 Roy, A. (2005). Urban informality: Toward an epistemology of planning. Journal of the American Planning
Association, 71(2), 147-158.
 Ward, P. M. (2004). Informality of Housing Production at the Urban-Rural Interface: The "Not So Strange
Case" of the Texas Colonias. In A. Roy & N. AlSayyad (Eds.), Urban informality: transnational perspectives
from the Middle East, Latin America, and South Asia (pp. 243-270). Lanham, Md.: Lexington Books.
 Yin, R. K. (2009). Case study research: design and methods. Los Angeles: Sage Publications.

Abstract Index #: 255
DO SHRINKING city ALLOW REDEVELOPMENT WITHOUT GENTRIFICATION? AN ANALYSIS OF AFFORDABILITY
BASED ON HOUSING AND TRANSPORTATION COSTS
Abstract System ID#: 453
Individual Paper
TIGHE, J. Rosie [Cleveland State University] j.l.tighe@csuohio.edu, presenting author, primary author
GANNING, Joanna [University of Utah] joanna.ganning@utah.edu
Recent press coverage and academic work has highlighted an emerging hypothesis in ongoing research on
shrinking city: downtown revitalization is creating a loss of affordable housing (e.g., Silverman), leading to
gentrification. However, we hypothesize that revitalization in shrinking city may support, rather than diminish
affordability, when affordability is measured as the costs of housing and transportation combined. This paper
employs the Location Affordability Index (LAI) to determine whether there are differences in housing +
transportation locational affordability between block groups that experienced redevelopment, decline, or no
statistically significant change between 2000 and 2010. Redevelopment is measured as changes in place-of-work
employment and residential population change over the decade.
On the housing side of the equation, recent research shows that in weak market city, excess real estate supply
prior to downtown redevelopment may be able to absorb new demand without displacing arts-based
employment, an industry traditionally vulnerable to gentrification (Ganning, forthcoming). It stands to reason,
then, that adequate supplies of affordable housing might remain as well. On the transportation side of this
equation, revitalization can create jobs, which can reduce or eliminate commuting costs. Neighborhood-level
investments also often pay for safety and public space upgrades which, among other things, facilitate walking.
Increased density brought about through redevelopment can also provide the necessary population to support
public transportation improvements. We thus hypothesize that the transportation savings realized through
neighborhood redevelopment may improve affordability conditions.
We will complete this analysis for owner and renter households separately using the LAI data as presented by
HUD, for households earning the regional median income, those at 80% of the median income, and households at
half the regional income. For each of these household types, we will analyze overall affordability, as well as its
component parts of housing and transportation, for each of the three types of block groups identified
(redeveloping, declining, or no significant change). Preliminary results support to our hypotheses.
An understanding of the dynamics of affordability of housing near redevelopment should take stock of both
housing and transportation costs. Yet, this has not been done to date. Such an analysis will allow researchers and
policy makers to leverage redevelopment for social equity gains through reduced transportation costs. In doing
so, planners and policymakers can leverage both subsidized housing dollars and transit funding more efficiently
and effectively in a way that maximizes the benefits to low income households.
References
 Ganning, J.P. “Arts stability and growth amid redevelopment in U.S. shrinking city’ downtowns: A case
study.” In press: Economic Development Quarterly.
 Lin, J. (2002). Gentrification and transit in Northwest Chicago. In Journal of the Transportation Research
Forum (Vol. 56, No. HS-043 476).
 Newman, K., & Wyly, E. K. (2006). The right to stay put, revisited: gentrification and resistance to
displacement in New York City. Urban Studies, 43(1), 23-57.
 Silverman, R., Yin, L., & Patterson, K. L. (2013). Dawn of the Dead City: an exploratory analysis of vacant
addresses in Buffalo, NY 2008–2010. Journal of Urban Affairs, 35(2), 131-152.
 Wyly, E. K., & Hammel, D. J. (2001). Gentrification, housing policy, and the new context of urban
redevelopment. Research in Urban Sociology, 6, 211-276.

Abstract Index #: 256
NEIGHBORHOOD DISORDER OR RESILIENCY? | ANALYZING CRIME PATTERNS USING AGENT-BASED MODELING
Abstract System ID#: 465
Individual Paper
KEMPER, Rebecca [The Ohio State University] kemper.30@osu.edu
Neighborhood Lifecycle Models predict urban decline from factors such as population mobility, housing stock
aging, and even population diversity to explain neighborhood ‘disorder,’ often measured as localized crime. It is
presumed that these interactions create a culture of crime and disorder, as first conceptualized by Shaw and
McKay (1942). Linear neighborhood lifecycle models make fundamental assumptions about people, relating to
their governance and their culture, and it is not surprising that such models took off in response to high levels of
inner-city crime during the 1980s and 1990s (Schwirian, 1983). Significant challenges to such thinking have
occurred, suggestive that social networks are adequate sources of resilient cultures and highly-functional social
norms (Innes & Booher, 2010; Ostrom, 1990). In addition, urban crime patterns may be impacted by  land_use
change such as demolition, abandonment or large infill projects that disrupt social networks in particular
neighborhoods rather than the other way around (Lin Liu & Eck, 2008). Networks of adaptive, diverse and
interdependent populations interacting with each other and their environment can result in neighborhood
resiliency as opposed to “disorder.”
Using agent-based modeling techniques, crime patterns in Columbus, Ohio neighborhood were analyzed over
the past four decades framed, first, with inputs based on the traditional Neighborhood Life Cycle model, and,
second, a separate model with a focus on  land_use change and more complex interactions between people and
their environment. The results from these models were then compared to the actual urban neighborhood crime
findings in Columbus. It was found that, in certain circumstances, the agent-based model based upon  land_use
change was more predictive than the Neighborhood Lifecycle agent-based model when forecasting where in
Columbus intractable crime verses reversed crime patterns occurred. This finding suggests that social networks,
when left undisturbed by large top-down  land_use changes, are able to effectuate needed changes in their own
environment to combat urban crime.
References
 Innes, Judith & Booher, David. Planning with Complexity: An Introduction to Collaborative Rationality for
Public Policy. New York: Routledge, 2010.
 Liu, Lin & Eck, John. Artificial Crime Analysis system: Using Computer Simulations and Geographic
Information system. Hershey, NY: Information Science Reference, 2008.
 Ostrom, Elinor. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. 1990.
 Schwirian, Ken. “Models of Neighborhood Change” Annual Review of Sociology. no. 9 (1983): 83-102
 Shaw, Clifford & McKay, Henry. Juvenile Delinquency in Urban area. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press 1942.

Abstract Index #: 257
SCHOOL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS: PLANNING, PUBLIC SCHOOLS AND THE EQUITABLE REDEVELOPMENT OF
URBAN neighborhood.
Abstract System ID#: 492
Individual Paper
STEIF, Kenneth [University of Pennsylvania] ksteif@upenn.edu, presenting author, primary author
BRINKLEY, Catherine [University of Pennsylvania] brinkley.kat@gmail.com
This paper lays the groundwork for a new placed-based intervention – School Improvement Districts. Only
recently has the Planning community begun to link elementary public education to urban economic development
and "place-making" – and it is these connections which provide the impetus for this study (Vincent, 2006).

Planning’s relative neglect of public education is surprising given that public school quality may be one of the
leading drivers of residential demand, and thus a key consideration when planning city (Dahlberg et al, 2012;
Silverman, 2014).
This paper argues that school quality may be one of the greatest untapped economic development resources in
cities. We review the mostly absentee planning literature related to public schools and neighborhood
development and provide a brief econometric case study that concludes although Philadelphia is a school quality
‘desert’, good schools still fetch a premium and great schools have the power to transform a neighborhood.
Finally, these results are used to motivate a new neighborhood intervention – School Improvement Districts. An
extension of the traditional Improvement District framework, School Improvement Districts would allow local
residents to vote to increase their local tax rate and put the incremental difference in tax revenues toward the
local school. Because our case studies show that the new school quality will be capitalized into local home prices,
we discuss how these Districts must be accompanied by a series of equity interventions that will encourage
housing affordability and limit residential displacement. The most important means to achieve this equity, we
argue, is to draw the District boundary to encompass a mixed-income neighborhood which would give planners
greater control over the supply of and demand for public goods like schools.
References
 Dahlberg, M. Eklöf, M. , Fredriksson, P. , & Jofre-Monseny, J. (2012). Estimating preferences for local
public services using migration data. Urban Studies, 49(2), 319-336.
 Silverman, R. M. (2014). Urban, Suburban, and Rural Contexts of School Districts and Neighborhood
Revitalization Strategies: Rediscovering Equity in Education Policy and urban_planning. Leadership and
Policy in Schools, 13(1), 3-27.
 Vincent, J. M. (2006). Public Schools as Public Infrastructure Roles for Planning Researchers. Journal of
Planning Education and Research 25(4), 433-437.

Abstract Index #: 258
MIX AND MATCH: DOES HOUSING MIX AFFECT RESIDENTIAL LOCATION CHOICE?
Abstract System ID#: 494
Individual Paper
MACHLER, Leonard [University of British Columbia] leonard.machler@alumni.ubc.ca
Policies aimed at improving the diversity of dwelling types represented in the residential stock have enjoyed
widespread support in the planning community. In particular, policymakers aligning with the Smart Growth
movement have advocated for improving housing mix, suggesting that neighborhood with a greater diversity
and distribution of housing types – such as townhomes, multifamily units and secondary suites, in addition to
single family homes - enable a broader spectrum of the population to live in the community of their choice
(Levine and Inam 2004; Talen and Knaap 2003). Improving residential matching opportunities may be particularly
important for households with Smart Growth preferences, since residing in comminuty with Smart Growth
characteristics has been linked to numerous social, environment, and economic benefits compared to residing
in more suburban residential environments (Burchell et al. 2002; Newman and Kenworthy 1999; Frumkin, Frank,
and Jackson 2004) and because Smart Growth neighbourhoods are increasingly in demand (Nelson 2013;
Leinberger 2008). However, few empirical studies have investigated whether a greater mix of housing types
successfully enables households to settle in the community of their choice. This paper presents results from a
doctoral dissertation aimed at uncovering the association between the degree of neighborhood housing mix and
the ability for households with preferences for Smart Growth neighborhood to reside in these comminuty.
These relationships are tested using data obtained from a household survey of 1,186 residents of Greater
Vancouver, Canada. It is anticipated that the final results from this dissertation will make significant
contributions to policy and research aimed at encouraging Smart Growth development and housing diversity.

References
 Levine, Jonathan, and Aseem Inam. 2004. "The Market for Transportation- land_use Integration: Do
Developers Want Smarter Growth than Regulations Allow?" Transportation no. 31 (4):409-427.
 Talen, Emily, and Gerrit Knaap. 2003. "Legalizing Smart Growth: An Empirical Study of  land_use
Regulation in Illinois." Journal of Planning Education and Research no. 22:345-359.
 Burchell, R.W., G. Lowenstein, W.R. Dolphin, C.C. Galley, A. Downs, S. Seskin, K.G. Still, and T. Moore.
2002. TCRP Report 74: Costs of sprawl —2000. Washington DC: Transportation Research Board, National
Research Council.
 Newman, Peter, and Jeffrey Kenworthy. 1999. Sustainability and city: Overcoming Automobile
Dependence. Washington, DC: Island Press.
 Frumkin, Howard, Lawrence Frank, and Richard Jackson. 2004. Urban Sprawl and Public Health:
Designing, Planning, and Building for Healthy comminuty. Washington, DC: Island Press.

Abstract Index #: 259
DO QUALIFIED ALLOCATION PLANS SHAPE SITING PATTERNS OF LIHTC DEVELOPMENTS?
Abstract System ID#: 500
Individual Paper
HORN, Keren [University of Massachusetts Boston] keren.horn@umb.edu, presenting author, primary author
ELLEN, Ingrid [New York University] ingrid.ellen@nyu.edu
Recent research has examined the siting patterns of Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) developments, but
the reality is that the LIHTC program is not one uniform, national program. Rather, the program is administered
by state allocating agencies, each of which has considerable discretion about how to allocate tax credits. In
particular, each state issues a Qualified Allocation Plan (QAP), which outlines the selection criteria the state will
use when awarding its nine percent tax credits. Some criteria are required by the federal government, such as
setting aside at least 10 percent of credits for nonprofit developers and using the minimum amount of tax credit
financing feasible. States are also allowed to adopt additional criteria, however, that further the state’s housing
policy and other goals, such as providing set-asides for developments with existing housing subsidies, such as the
HOPE VI Program, or awarding bonus points for locating developments in particular types of neighborhood. As
the competition for credits has increased, it seems likely that these criteria play a greater role in shaping where
tax credit developments are built.
QAP features vary considerably across states and often change radically within a state over time. This analysis
examines whether and how the features of QAPs shape siting patterns of tax credit developments. In particular,
we study changes in the location criteria outlined in QAPs for 21 different states across the country between
2002 and 2010 and observe whether and how those modifications are associated with changes in the poverty
rates of the neighborhood where developments awarded tax credits are located.
We focus on five major categories of priorities states use to decide on how to allocate their credits: (1) highopportunity neighborhood, (2) proximity to amenities, (3) approval by the community, (4) furthering investment
in blighted neighborhood, and (5) avoiding concentrations of affordable housing. These categories were chosen
because they appeared—in some form—in most of the states we reviewed. Furthermore, we expect all of these
criteria to be correlated with neighborhood attributes and to thereby effect a developer’s decision about where
to propose and build a project.
We rely on a series of different neighborhood poverty measures to describe siting patterns. First, we calculate
the change in the share of LIHTC units allocated that are located in high-poverty neighborhood (those census
tracts with poverty rates greater than 30 percent) as well as the change in the share allocated in low-poverty
neighborhoods (those census tracts with poverty rates of less than 10 percent). We also calculate the change in
the exposure to poverty of the allocated tax credit units during our study period, using the exposure index. The
exposure index captures the extent to which units in developments allocated tax credits are located in census
tracts with poor individuals. This measure captures the tract poverty rate of the average unit in a development
allocated tax credits in each state. Rather than focusing on the share of developments in each neighborhood

type, the exposure measure is able to detect a change in the overall distribution of tax credit allocations across a
state.
Overall we find evidence suggesting that QAPs matter. Even with a small sample size of 21 states we find
statistically significant relationships between changes in QAPs and the locations of tax credit allocations. We find
that overall states which increased priorities towards higher opportunity area exhibited increases in the share of
tax credits allocated for projects in low poverty area, decreases in the share of tax credits allocated for projects
in high poverty area as well as decreases in the overall exposure to poverty of projects allocated tax credits.
References
 Khadduri, Jill. "Creating balance in the locations of LIHTC developments: The role of qualified allocation
plans." Washington, DC: Poverty and Race Research Action Council (2013).
 O'Regan, Katherine M., and Keren M. Horn. "What Can We Learn About the Low-Income Housing Tax
Credit Program by Looking at the Tenants?." Housing Policy Debate 23, no. 3 (2013): 597-613.
 Ellen, Ingrid Gould, Katherine O'Regan, and Ioan Voicu. "Siting, spillovers, and segregation: A
reexamination of the Low Income Housing Tax Credit program."Housing Markets and the Economy: Risk,
Regulation, Policy; Essays in Honor of Karl Case (2009): 233-67.
 Freeman, Lance. “Siting affordable housing: Location and neighborhood trends of low income housing
tax credit developments in the 1990s.” (2004). Brookings Institution, Center on Urban and Metropolitan
Policy.
 McClure, Kirk. "The low‐income housing tax credit program goes mainstream and moves to the
suburbs." Housing Policy Debate 17, no. 3 (2006): 419-446.

Abstract Index #: 260
HOUSING AND THE GRASSROOTS: USING LOCAL AND EXPERT KNOWLEDGE TO PRESERVE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING
Abstract System ID#: 505
Individual Paper
HOWELL, Kathryn [Virginia Commonwealth University] klhowell@vcu.edu
In city with rapid population growth in the urban core, many neighborhood that have been home to lowincome comminuty of color for decades have experienced rapid acceleration in high-end residential and retail
development. One consequence of this redevelopment has been that, nationwide, hundreds of thousands of
previously-subsidized affordable housing units have been lost due opt-out, sale or demolition (Schwartz 2014).
Several jurisdictions have begun to track the subsidy expiration of these units and offered incentives for their
preservation through the Low Income Housing Tax Credit and other federal funds (Reina & Williams 2012).
However, intervening into the market process of opt-out, sale and conversion remains challenging.
Washington, DC, organizers and affordable housing advocates have effectively used quantitative and qualitative
housing data to prevent the loss subsidized, rent stabilized and market-affordable housing in gentrifying
neighborhoods through the DC Preservation Network (DCPN). Initially created in 2007 through partnership
between the National Low Income Housing Coalition, the Urban Institute and the local Coalition for Nonprofit
Housing and Economic Development (CNHED), the DCPN expanded a database of subsidized units in the District,
categorized by the degree of risk of losing the subsidy attached to the building. The network is comprised of
tenant organizers, foundations, nonprofit developers, City and federal agency staff, and policy advocates who
meet monthly and discuss preservation at the building level. In addition to the quantitative data about the
subsidies, inspection scores, addresses, and number of units, the network collects significant qualitative data
from all members. The qualitative data collected includes information about opt-outs, conditions and sale from
tenants, and information from foundations and agency staff about affordability covenants, enforcement, and
funding. This data is documented in continuous and updated narratives about each building maintained by DCPN
and the Urban Institute. This data has enabled groups from the grassroots to HUD to act more effectively and
quickly to assert rights, enforce laws, provide legal support, or approve funding for preservation.

Many preservation efforts have relied on well-intended top-down efforts of foundations, nonprofit developers
and agency staff to select and preserve buildings for preservation. Washington, DC offers an important example
of the ways in which the preservation effort has been led from the grassroots, in line with Sandercock’s (1998)
broadening of the field to one that encompasses “planning from below.” She contends that this redefinition can
“create the possibility of a far more inclusive set of narratives, embracing… comminuty who have all, in
response to their exclusion from mainstream planning, developed counterplanning traditions of self-help,
community solidarity, and community organizing for social and economic development” (pp. 9-10). This paper
argues that DCPN is effective because it offers a space of translation between traditional “expert” knowledge of
government agencies and “local” knowledge of tenants and grassroots organizers and uses a mix of qualitative
methods which allow the planner to hear the voices of residents and understand the everyday experiences of
spaces (Holston 1995). By developing this space, these groups have co-produced knowledge to not only preserve
buildings on a case-by-case basis, but ultimately to create and advocate for a preservation strategy for the
District.
Using in-depth interviews, direct and participant observation, and archival data, this paper examines the case of
the DCPN and the part traditional planning experts and grassroots organizers have played in the effort to
preserve affordable units in the District of Columbia. This paper also analyzes the challenges to this model for
tenants, the City, and the nonprofits involved. Finally, this paper discusses the larger implications for planning
and policy in the changing affordable housing landscape.
References
 Schwartz, A. F. (2014). Housing Policy in the United States. New York: Routledge.
 Reina, V & Williams, M. 2012 The Importance of Using Layered Data to Analyze Housing: The Case of the
Subsidized Housing Information Project. Cityscape, 14 (1), 215-222
 Sandercock, L. (1998). Framing Insurgent Historiographies. In L. Sandercock, Making the Invisible Visible:
A multicultural planning history (pp. 1-33). Berkeley: University of California Press.
 Holston, J. (1995). Spaces of Insurgent Citizenship. Planning Theory, 13, 35-51.

Abstract Index #: 261
EXAMINE THE DETERMINANTS OF VOUCHER LOCATIONAL OUTCOMES
Abstract System ID#: 506
Individual Paper
ALAKSHENDRA, Abhinav [University of Florida] alakshendra@ufl.edu, presenting author
WANG, Ruoniu [University of Florida] wrnvince@ufl.edu, primary author
With the notion that neighborhood environments influence life outcomes (Andersson et al., 2007), federal
housing policy shifted during the past two decades in support for deconcentrating the poor and improving their
circumstances. One principal housing program is the Housing Choice Voucher Program (HCVP), created by the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and operated by local Public Housing Authorities. Through
providing direct cash payment to the poor that allows individuals the freedom of choice in the market system,
the HCVP “subsidizes market winners while at the same time subsidizing the poor” (Deng 2007, p.21). However,
literature has not yet fully addressed the linkage between locational outcomes and housing choice determinants.
Focusing on the debate of whether HCVP is successful in promoting upward mobility, this study attempts to
identify the determinants of voucher locational outcomes and to find out to what extent these determinants
affect the locational outcomes. The theoretical base of this research is the consumer behavior model, developed
by Pearmain and his colleague in 1991. This model lays out a framework that identifies components of choice and
relationships among them, which is adapted in this research to conceptualize the housing choice process.
Evaluation of voucher locations is based on a recent study that uses the Housing Suitability Model, a GIS-based
model that characterizes voucher locations and other residential parcels across the county in terms of
“opportunity” and “accessibility” (Wang, Larsen, and Ray, 2015).

This paper primarily focuses on three questions:
1. Whether voucher location outcome is associated with the combined effect of preferences and
constraints?
2. Whether voucher locational outcome is associated with housing search strategy? And
3. To what extent do location choice factors, such as preference, search strategy, voucher subgroups, and
constraints, affect voucher locational outcome.
The research will use primary data collected through survey between 2013 and 2014. The first and second
research questions are addressed through categorizing the combined effect of preferences and constraints, as
well as housing search strategies. The ANOVA analysis will be conducted to examine locational differences
measured by suitability scores across aforementioned categories. The third research question will be addressed
through conducting regression analysis to identify determinants of voucher locational outcomes. The study area
is Duval County, Florida, a rapidly growing county known for its low density, suburban-style development.
Compared to the earlier studies focusing on evaluation of the HCVP in denser urban area, a study in the context
of newer Sunbelt metropolitan area offers a valuable alternative lens to understand HCV location patterns.
This research intends to add to the literature on evaluation of HCVP by linking locational outcome with housing
choice determinants through econometric modeling. Findings of this research intend to provide quantitative and
statistically demonstrated evidences to policymakers who make policy adjustments/interventions accordingly.
References
 Deng, Lan. 2007. Comparing the effects of housing vouchers and low-income housing tax credits on
neighborhood integration and school quality. Journal of Planning Education and Research 27 (1): 20-35.
 Pearmain, D., & Gleave, S. D. (1991). Stated preference techniques: A guide to practice Steer Davies
Gleave.
 Wang, R., Larsen, K. and Ray, A. (2015). “Rethinking Locational Outcomes for Housing Choice Vouchers:
A Case Study in Duval County, Florida.” Housing Policy Debate. doi: 10.1080/10511482.2014.968182

Abstract Index #: 262
THE G WORD: WHAT DO WE MEAN WHEN WE TALK ABOUT GENTRIFICATION?
Abstract System ID#: 509
Individual Paper
WEBB, Michael [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] mdwebb@unc.edu, presenting author, primary
author
NGUYEN, Mai [University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill] mai@unc.edu
Gentrification, one of the most politically-loaded terms in the urban studies literature, has arguably become the
dominant urban issue for academics, planners, and activists (Davidson & Lees, 2010). From the ‘modest mews’
‘invaded by the middle-classes’ as described by Glass (1964), gentrification has come to encompass a plethora of
neighborhood change processes in countless contexts. Despite the significant attention it has received, however,
there exists little to no consensus on what, exactly, constitutes gentrification. For many, it is synonymous with
the displacement of lower- or working-class residents by a more well-to-do cohort; however, the term has come
to encompass neighborhood change that does not displace residents, such as investments in previously-industrial
districts. Further, because gentrification is so closely associated with displacement – and the hardships
engendered by it – the term has become a rallying point for activists and academics seeking to halt its expansion
(Slater, 2006).
Given these controversies, scholars have proposed a variety of new terms to better encompass the breadth of
contemporary upward urban neighborhood change processes, including redevelopment, regeneration,
reurbanisation, and revitalization, among many others. In addition to describing a wider variety of phenomena,
these terms lack the negative political connotations of gentrification and hope to move beyond the political and

activist struggles associated with the term to a more holistic and balanced debate of the change processes (Haase
et al., 2010; Scott, 2011).
This paper frames debates and discourse about neighborhood change nomenclature by examining the literature
to understand what scholars mean when they use gentrification and similar concepts to describe upward urban
neighborhood change. It develops a typology of neighborhood change which (i) identifies the contexts,
processes, and patterns associated with each term; (ii) describes the consequences related to both resident
displacement and the built and natural environments; and (iii) surveys the moral judgments and political
arguments associated with each term. While the paper will likely not settle debates on defining gentrification, it
will provide a synthesis of the literature valuable to academics, planners, and activists.
References
 Glass, R. (1964). London: Aspects of Change. London: McGibbon & Kee
 Haase, A., Kabisch, S., Steinführer, A., Bouzarovski, S., Hall, R., & Ogden, P. (2010). Emergent Spaces of
Reurbanisation: Exploring the Demographic Dimension of Inner-city Residential Change in a European
Setting. Population, Space and Place, 16, 443–463.
 Scott, A. J. (2011). A World in Emergence: Notes toward a Resynthesis of Urban-Economic Geography for
the 21st Century. Urban Geography, 32(6), 845–870.
 Slater, T. (2006). The Eviction of Critical Perspectives from Gentrification Research. International Journal
of Urban and Regional Research, 30(4), 737–757.

Abstract Index #: 263
THE EFFICACY OF LOCAL COMPREHENSIVE PLANS ON HOUSING AFFORDABILITY
Abstract System ID#: 510
Individual Paper
JUN, Hee Jung [Eastern Michigan University] hjun1@emich.edu
Local comprehensive plans are critical in guiding sufficient housing supply for all residents, including low-income
households. Despite extensive studies in plan quality analysis, few studies have examined the efficacy of local
comprehensive plans on community outcomes. As far as I recognize, Aurand’s study (2014) is the only study
directly testing the relationship between housing requirements in local comprehensive plans and affordability
outcomes. The major finding of Aurand’s study (2014) is that the strength of local comprehensive plans toward
affordable housing is positively related to the enhancement in affordability for low-income households in Florida.
However, localities in other states may have different dynamics from those in Florida. In particular, Michigan is a
state located in the rustbelt region and has economically struggled, thereby suggesting that housing affordability
may have been more neglected. According to Harvard Joint Center for Housing Studies (2013), Michigan is one of
the states that have the most severe housing affordability burdens.
This study aims at examining the relationship between the strength of local comprehensive plans toward
affordable housing in the Detroit metropolitan area (MA), MI and subsequent changes in housing affordability for
low-income households between 2000 and 2010. The strength of local comprehensive plans toward housing
affordability will be evaluated by counting the number of plan policy linked to affordable housing for lowincome households (e.g., community land trust and community development block grant) for the 92
municipalities that have more than 10,000 residents as of 2000. The efficacy of local comprehensive plans on
housing affordability will be examined by running a regression analysis between the strength of local
comprehensive plans toward housing affordability and subsequent changes in the share of housing cost
burdened households and affordable rental units. Given that there are limited studies on the efficacy of local
comprehensive plans on community outcomes, this study will significantly contributes to the literature.
References
 Aurand, Andrew. 2014. Florida's Planning Requirements and Affordability for Low-Income Households.
Housing Studies 29, 5: 677-700.






Berke, Philip R.and Maria Manta Conroy. 2000. Are We Planning for Sustainable Development? An
Evaluation of 30 Comprehensive Plans. Journal of the American Planning Association 66, 1: 21-33.
Joint Center for Housing Studies, 2013. America’s Rental Housing. Cambridge, MA
Jun, Hee-Jung Jun and Maria Manta Conroy. 2014. Linking Resilience and Sustainability in Ohio Township
Planning. Journal of environment Planning and Management. 57, 6: 904-919.
Jun, Hee-Jung and Maria Manta Conroy. 2013. Comprehensive Planning and Sustainability in Georgia’s
Exurbs. Journal of environment Policy and Planning. 15, 3: 329-351.

Abstract Index #: 264
ARE THE MILLENNIALS COMING TO TOWN?: INTRA-METROPOLITAN LOCATIONAL PATTERNS OF YOUNG
ADULTS
Abstract System ID#: 511
Pre-organized Session: Broad Scale  impact of Millennials in the City
LEE, Hyojung [University of Southern California] hyojung.lee@usc.edu
As the nation faces dramatic demographic shifts at the same time of economic hardship and sluggish recovery,
the Millennial Generation is gaining increasing attention. That is not merely due to their sheer size of population,
which makes them the largest generation in American history. It is rather the distinctive view and behavior of
this birth cohort that makes people think that the Millennials will reshape many parts of our economy and
society, including the urban landscape. Some, for example Florida (2010), argue that the new generation values
home and car ownership less and emphasizes more the flow of ideas and communication, which leads them to
prefer living in city. Finding more young hipsters in downtown apartments, bars, and streets, and a rising local
population total, some people even declare the comeback of the urban cores. Others express concerns about the
Millennials’ delays in household formation and homeownership in the recession and recovery, as the current
housing setbacks may lead to persistent effects on their whole housing career (Furman, 2014). The distinctive
characteristics of this generation might simply reflect the young adults’ responses to the economic crisis. It may
also be a continuation of a previous long-term trend, which may be accelerated during the recession and
recovery. Some of the Millennials’  impact may be city-wide and not just focused downtown, because the
Millennials are so numerous. Or these effects might only be expressed through subgroups such as the most
highly educated. What is needed is a more systematic overview of the growth of key groups in different
locations.
Using the most comprehensive and detailed information on the Millennials and young adults provided by the
decennial Census and American Community Survey, both in summary tables and public use microdata files
(PUMS), this paper documents the demographic changes that U.S. city have experienced in the last five decades
by distance from the city center in the 50 largest metropolitan area. To examine whether the Millennials have
led the rebirth and growth of downtown, this research investigates the living arrangements and geographic
location of young adults age 25 to 34, using the ring analysis followed in the Census Bureau’s special report
(2012). Analyzing the patterns by their socio-economic characteristics, such as race/ethnicity, education, and
tenure status, enables us to understand more comprehensively the most diverse generation in the nation’s
history.
The results of the analyses indicate that the city cores have not witnessed the comeback of the urban cores for
total population but only for young population within 7.5 miles of the city centers, in both absolute and relative
terms. However, there have also been substantial population and household growth of the 25-34 population in
suburban area between 20 and 40 miles, where the total population growth has been the greatest as well. By
looking into the growth of the Millennials by their educational attainment, the paper finds that it is the young
adults with bachelor or higher degrees who have driven the growth of the urban cores, while the ones with lower
educational attainment have been found more often in the suburban area. Yet, the housing stock analysis
suggests that the young adults’ movement towards urban cores have occurred though replacing older-aged and
moderate income tenants, sometimes in the forms of gentrification, not by new construction of rental or owner-

occupied housing units. The analysis also finds much stronger evidence of downtown concentration in
northeastern and Midwestern metros than in the south or west.
References
 Furman, J. (2014). America’s Millennials in the recovery. Keynote address at the Zillow Housing Forum,
Washington, D.C., July 24, 2014. Retrieved from
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/americas_millenials_in_the_recovery_jf_7.24.14.p
df
 Frey, W. H. (2014). The uneven aging and ‘younging’ in America: State and metropolitan trends in the
2010 Census. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
 Florida, R. (2010). The great reset: How new ways of living and working drive post-crash prosperity. New
York: Harper Collins.
 Myers, D., & Pitkin, J. (2009). Demographic forces and turning points in the American city, 1950 to 2040.
Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences 626: 91-111.
 US Census Bureau. (2012). Pattern of metropolitan and micropolitan population change: 2000 to 2010.
Census Special Reports (C2010SR-01). Washington, DC: US Census Bureau.

Abstract Index #: 265
WALKABILITY AND SUBSIDIZED HOUSING IN SHRINKING U.S. city: ASSESSING NEIGHBORHOOD
ACCESSIBILITY OF SUBSIDIZED HOUSING
Abstract System ID#: 520
Individual Paper
YIN, li [University at Buffalo, SUNY] liyin@buffalo.edu, presenting author, primary author
PATTERSON, Kelly [university at buffalo] klp27@buffalo.edu
SILVERMAN, Robert [University at Buffalo] rms35@buffalo.edu
It has been well established that access to opportunities or resources is one of the essential components of
subsidized housing policy (Talen and Koschinsky, 2014). Access to opportunities promotes economic and social
mobility and healthy lifestyles. Siting affordable housing in sustainable neighborhood that are walkable and
accessible to services and facilities can be especially important for low income residents who may be more
affected by physical proximity and rely more on the neighborhood and community-based resources than other
income level residents. As stated by Schwartz (2011), however, “the literature on sustainability and housing has
paid little attention to low-income or to subsidized housing” and “[v]ery little attention had been paid to the
connection between subsidized housing and environment sustainability’’ (p29). Using Walkscore data at the
census block group level, Talen and Koschinsky (2014) found that a high percentage of the federally subsidized
housing is in poor-access locations in six metropolitan area, with over 90% in Atlanta and Phoenix.
This study contributes to the discussion of subsidized housing and sustainable neighborhood by adding another
dimension—considering the unique characteristics of city and regions experiencing population decline and by
using a finer spatial scale. Past research suggests that development in shrinking city occurs in a different context
than in city and regions experiencing growth (Silverman et al. 2013). Shrinking city are among the most
distressed in the US and face acute levels of poverty, fiscal stress, and institutional constraints. It is critical to
understand the neighborhood context of subsidized housing in these city in order to help identify
neighborhoods of opportunity for targeted subsidized development that promotes sustainable affordable
housing. This project examines the neighborhood context of subsidized housing with respect to accessibility and
walkability in shrinking rust belt city.
Among Walkscore’s top 10 picks for affordable and walkable American city (Walkscore, 2014), three of them
are on the list of the top 10 metropolitan area in the U.S. with the fastest declining population between 1980
and 2010 (Frey, 2012). These city are Buffalo, NY, Pittsburgh, PA, and Cleveland, OH. This study included all
three city, in addition to another rust belt city, Detroit, MI as our case study area. Two measures for walkability
were used including walk score and walkabiilty index. Data collected for the walkability analysis include walk

scores at the census block level collected from Walkscore, retail walking destinations, service walking
destinations, cultural and educational walking destinations, parks, streets, bus and transit stations, and census
data from a variety of sources. Walkability indices are constructed based on these destinations and variables that
reflect street connectivity and population density, as suggested by the literature (Duncan et al., 2011; Yin, 2013).
Both walk scores and a walkability indexes are used to assess neighborhood walkability and accessibility.
Following Talen and Koschinsky (2014), both descriptive statistics and regression models will be used to examine
the level of neighborhood access for subsidized housing, and to test the relationship between high percentage of
subsidized housing with different accessibility levels and different indicators of neighborhood quality such as
crime.
The results from this study can help planners and funding agencies to understand how to achieve neighborhood
access for low income residents to support the development of sustainable affordable housing and evaluate
affordable housing outcomes. They can also help to create a framework for comparative analysis of affordable
housing outcomes in city and regions experiencing variable levels of economic development and growth to help
our understanding of the relationship between local and regional conditions on housing outcomes and assist all
regions in adapting their affordable housing strategies as local economic conditions change over time.
References
 Duncan, D.T., Aldstadt, J., Whalen, J., Melly, S.J., Gortmaker, S.L. (2011) Validation of walk score for
estimating neighborhood walkability: an analysis of four US metropolitan area. International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health, 8(11):pp4160–4179
 Schwartz, A. (2011) Comment on Emily Talen and Julia Koschinsky's “Is subsidized housing in sustainable
neighborhoods? Evidence from Chicago”, Housing Policy Debate, 21(1), pp29-32
 Silverman, R.M., Yin, L, and Patterson, K. (2013). Dawn of the Dead City: An Exploratory Analysis of
Vacant Addresses in Buffalo, NY 2008-2010.Journal of Urban Affairs 35(2), pp131-152
 Talen, E. (2014). The Neighborhood Quality of Subsidized Housing, Journal of the American Planning
Association, 80(1), pp67-82
 Yin, L. 2013 Assessing Walkability in the City of Buffalo: An Application of Agent-Based Simulation,
Journal of urban_planning and Development. 139(3). pp166-175

Abstract Index #: 266
THE INTRA-URBAN DYNAMICS OF CHINA'S HOUSING BOOM: A CASE STUDY OF CHENGDU, SICHUAN
Abstract System ID#: 523
Individual Paper
HU, Wanyang [University of California, Los Angeles] huwanyang@gmail.com, presenting author
MONKKONEN, Paavo [University of California, Los Angeles] monkkonen@gmail.com, primary author
DENG, Guoying [School of Economics, Sichuan University] dengguoying@scu.edu.cn
China's property market has been the subject of a flood of media coverage in recent years. Rapid price increases
for residential property and the possibility of a price bubble in many city has led the central government to take
a myriad of regulatory measures to cool housing markets. Yet, scholarly attention has focused either on inter-city
analyses or case studies of the high-GDP coastal city like Shanghai and Beijing, and too little is known about the
property market dynamics of more typical Chinese city. Chengdu, the capital of Sichuan province, is not among
the extremely high priced city nor has it seen bubble-like price increases, thus is taken as an average city. Using
a comprehensive set of georeferenced housing transactions, joined with remote sensing data, and data on
neighborhood amenities and transportation infrastructure, this paper analyzes the spatial dynamics of the
Chengdu housing market from 2004 to 2011. During this time period the real sales price of an average apartment
increased by more than 40 percent, but simple descriptions obscure major changes in the housing stock. Findings
highlight the shift to a bimodal distribution of prices and unit sizes, a growing premium placed on larger units,
and a complex relationship between price and the proximity to the city center. These unpredicted features of the
market are linked to government intervention. Moreover, a lower price for units developed by state-owned-

enterprise developers is also found, indicating a low efficiency and profitability for state-owned-enterprises
compared with private firms.
References
 Deng, Yongheng, Daniel P. McMillen, and Tien Foo Sing. 2012. Private residential price indices in
Singapore: A matching approach. Regional Science and Urban Economics 42: 485–494.
 McMillen, Daniel. 2008. Changes in the distribution of house prices over time: structural characteristics,
neighborhood or coefficients? Journal of Urban Economics 64: 573–589.
 Monkkonen, Paavo, Kelvin S.K. Wong, and Jaclene Begley. 2012. Economic Restructuring, Urban Growth,
and Short-term Trades: The Spatial Dynamics of the Hong Kong Housing Market, 1992-2008. Regional
Science and Urban Economics 42(3): 396-406.
 Wu, Jing, Joseph Gyourko, and Yongheng Deng. 2012. Evaluating conditions in major Chinese housing
markets. Regional Science and Urban Economics 42: 531–543
 Zheng, Siqi, and Matthew E. Kahn. 2008. Land and residential property markets in a booming economy:
New evidence from Beijing. Journal of Urban Economics 63: 743–757.

Abstract Index #: 267
THE EFFECT OF THE GREAT RECESSION ON RENTAL HOUSING AFFORDABILITY
Abstract System ID#: 533
Individual Paper
LENS, Michael [University of California, Los Angeles] mlens@ucla.edu
The Great Recession was a substantial upheaval for Americans across the income spectrum. Those with housing
equity were particularly hard-hit, and the declines in housing wealth have been well-documented. What is less
discussed are the effects on those that rented their homes, who on average experienced declines in income due
to reduced employment opportunities. Further, in many markets, the foreclosure and credit crises contributed to
increased demand for rental housing, as foreclosed homeowners began to rent and fewer households became
homeowners due to tight credit and labor markets. In these cases, renters had more competition for procuring
rental housing and less money to do so.
This paper analyzes the changes to rental markets during and after the Great Recession in the United States.
Specifically, I examine the extent to which rental housing became less affordable for Extremely Low-Income (ELI)
households. I document changes in housing subsidy demand during this time period, then examine how the
supply of housing subsidies kept pace with these demand changes. I then run regression models to determine
what metropolitan area housing market and economic characteristics are most strongly associated with larger
affordability gaps before and after the Great Recession.
Nationwide, it is clear that rental affordability gaps became more pronounced during the Great Recession. In 68%
of counties and 69% of MSAs in my sample, there was an increase from 2007 to 2010 in the number of ELI
households per affordable rental unit. Across the country, the increase was 11% in the MSA sample and 17% in
the county sample, which are dramatic increases for only a 3-year period.
Not surprisingly, the data show wide variation across MSAs and counties in housing affordability gaps. Controlling
for area median income, urban area in the South have higher numbers of ELI households per affordable rental
unit. The area with the largest increases during the recession are a bit more idiosyncratic – affordability
problems were exacerbated in all area of the country, and these changes were slightly more substantial in the
West and South.
Preliminary models suggest that declines in the public housing stock are associated with increased affordability
problems during the recession. High-cost loan and foreclosure rates have a weakly significant connection to
rental housing affordability increases during the recession.

Abstract Index #: 268
A QUADRUPLE BOTTOM LINE FRAMEWORK FOR COMMUNITY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Abstract System ID#: 535
Individual Paper
HERRANZ, Joaquin [University of Washington] jherranz@uw.edu
The proposed paper will provide a conceptual framework and empirically-based case study for clarifying and
categorizing four inter-related outcomes of community economic development: economic development, social
equity, environment sustainability, and creative cultural vitality. This perspective extends the triple bottom line
approach that focuses on developing projects that simultaneously yield economic, social, and environment
benefits. Several researchers argue that creative individuals and industries increasingly drive regional economic
growth as part of global restructuring (Florida 2005; Scott 2004); cultural vitality is an under-emphasized yet
measurable asset and process of community development (Jackson et al 2006); and that the impact of artistic
clusters is often place-specific as well as under-estimated (Grodach et al 2014). However, few studies examine
cultural creativity in the comparative context of economic, social, and environment development. The proposed
paper contributes to existing literature by addressing the question of whether a creative cultural vitality outcome
is conceptually and empirically distinct from economic, social, and environment outcomes. The paper will
provide a case analysis of the quadruple bottom line framework by examining three different community
economic development projects in Seattle. The case analyses will highlight the emergence of a quadruple bottom
line policy framework as well as will examine the trade-offs associated with quadruple bottom line community
economic development. Case data—collected annually between 2005 and 2014 by graduate researchers in a
Community Economic Development course at the University of Washington—include field studies, key informant
interviews, documents review, and photo and video documentaries. The paper will discuss the implications of a
quadruple bottom line approach for researchers and practitioners of community economic development.
References
 Florida, Richard. 2005. city and the Creative Class. New York: Routledge.
 Grodach, Carl, Currid-Halkett, Elizabeth, Foster, Nicole and Murdoch, James. 2014. The location patterns
of artistic clusters: A metro and neighborhood level analysis. Urban Studies.
 Jackson, Maria Rosario, Florence Kabwasa-Green, and Joaquin Herranz, Jr. 2006. Cultural Vitality in
Communities: Interpretations and Indicators. Washington DC: Urban Institute Press.
 Scott, Allen. 2004. “Cultural-Products Industries and Urban Economic Development,” Urban Affairs
Review 39(4):461-490.
 Wheeler, Stephen. 2004. Planning for Sustainability: Creating Livable, Equitable, and Ecological
Communities. New York: Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 269
IN SEARCH OF LOCATION-AFFORDABLE HOUSING: CHALLENGES FACED BY VOUCHER PROGRAM PARTICIPANTS
Abstract System ID#: 541
Individual Paper
DANN, Ryan [Portland State University] rjdann@pdx.edu, presenting author
TREMOULET, Andree [Portland State University] atrem@pdx.edu, primary author
ADKINS, Arlie [University of Arizona] arlieadkins@email.arizona.edu
As a percentage of their income, low-income households have the most to gain from the transportation cost
savings of location efficient housing. In a tight housing market, however, low-income renters have limited choices
about where to live. The Housing Choice Voucher Program is designed to provide low-income households with
choice by helping cover the gap between affordable and market rate rents, which should increase opportunities
for securing location efficient housing.

But how effective is this program at providing access to location efficient housing in tight housing markets with
high demand for walkable, service-rich, transit-accessible, urban housing locations? In this paper we address this
question through an examination of the pre and post-move location efficiency of more than 2,000 voucher
recipients who moved in the Portland, Oregon region during 2012 and 2013. During this time residential rental
vacancy rates ranged from 3% to 4%, less than half the national average.
Pre and post-move addresses were obtained from three housing authorities in the region. Each before-after
address pair was then geo-coded and paired with block group level data from the EPA’s Smart Location Database.
In order to test the impact of demand for urban housing, movers were split into two categories, depending on
whether they were located in urban or suburban jurisdictions. Differences were tested in overall pre and postmove location efficiency and in relative change between movers in urban and suburban area.
Preliminary results indicate that urban voucher recipients are moving to block groups that are significantly less
location efficient than their previous homes with regard to urban form, transit service frequency/proximity and
employment density. Meanwhile, suburban voucher holders’ location efficiency remained stable. Urban voucher
recipients continued to live in more location efficient area than suburban voucher recipients, but moving
narrowed this gap.
These outcomes occurred despite policy implemented by an innovative urban Moving to Work housing
authority to promote greater choice by voucher recipients, including higher payment standards for low-poverty,
high-rent area and the flexibility of allotting up to 70% of income for housing costs. At the time, Oregon
landlords were not required to accept vouchers, a policy that changed effective July 2014.
Our findings serves as a cautionary tale about how, in some tight housing markets where demand for urban
housing is on the rise, housing vouchers are not able to overcome market forces and retain location efficient
housing options for those who need them most. These findings will be explored within the context of potential
regional policy solutions that both include and go beyond what housing authorities can accomplish alone.
References
 Pendall, R, Hayes, C., George, A., McDade, Z., Dawkins, C., Jeon, J.S., Knaap, E., Blumenberg, E. Pierce, G.,
& Smart, M. (2014, March).Driving to opportunity: Understanding the links among transportation
access, residential outcomes and economic opportunity for housing voucher recipients (Report).
Retrieved from Urban Institute website: http://www.urban.org/publications/413078.html
 Skobba, K. & Goetz, E. (2013). Mobility decisions of very low-income households. Cityscape, 15, 155 –
171. Retrieved from http://www.huduser.org/portal/periodicals/cityscpe/vol15num2/index.html
 Song, Y. & Knaap, G. (2003). New urbanism and housing values: A disaggregate assessment. Journal of
Urban Economics, 54, 218-238. doi:10.1016/S0094-1190(03)00059-7
 Finkel, M. & Buron, L. (2001, November) Study on section 8 voucher success rates: Quantitative study of
success rates in metropolitan area (Report No. C-OPC-18571). Retrieved from HUD User website:
http://www.huduser.org/portal/publications/pubasst/sec8success.html
 Scott, M., Cunningham, M., Biess, J., O’Neil, J., Tegeler, P., Gayles, E., & Sard, B. (2013, February).
Expanding choice: Practical strategies for building a successful housing mobility program. The Urban
Institute & Poverty and Race Research Action Council. Retrieved from
http://www.prrac.org/pdf/ExpandingChoice.pdf

Abstract Index #: 270
HOUSING AND COMMUNITY TRANSFORMATION IN RAPIDLY URBANIZING CHINA
Abstract System ID#: 556
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session
CAO, Jason [Univ. of Minnesota] cao@umn.edu
DENG, Lan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] landeng@umich.edu

This event is sponsored by International Association for China Planning (IACP)
This roundtable will discuss housing and community transformation of post-reform China in the last three
decades. It sheds light upon the transformation, reconfiguration, and reconstruction of housing, comminuty,
and social space in rapidly urbanizing China. Since late 1970s, along with market-led reform and open door
policies, three forces of marketization, globalization, and urbanization have been reshaping Chinese city. China
has achieved a remarkable success as its economy stands as the second largest of the global, only after the US.
Unprecedented economic, social, cultural and political changes have been widely identified. Specially, along with
social stratification, spatial differentiation, as well as the social and spatial mobility of urbanites, rural migrants,
and even foreign settlers, we have witnessed the shifting and sorting of Chinese into various houses and
communities: villas, commodity housing estates, comminuty of public housing, social/affordable housing, and
urbanized villages. As China enters a new stage of ‘slower’ development, it is time for us to summarize the
mechanism of urban changes for China during the last three decades, especially at the meso or micro level.
Therefore, it is important to record, interrogate and theorize everyday practices of her urbanism, to articulate her
actually existed urbanization, and to examine the restless transformation of comminuty and housing in China.
This panel brings a holistic understanding of housing and community transformation during China’s rapid
urbanization. It demands further theoretical and empirical efforts to deepen our understanding of housing and
community changes. It encourages further interdisciplinary exchanges among geography, planning, sociology,
anthropology, politics, and so on.
The panel will be moderated by Dr. Lan Deng, University of Michigan. The panelists and their specific topics are as
follows:
Dr. Zhigang Li, Sun Yat-Sen University: Assemblage, entrepreneurial suburbanism, and the restless (re)making of
suburbia in China
Dr. Lingyun Fan, Suzhou University of Science and Technology: Evolution process and mechanism of rural social
space in Suzhou
Dr. Zhilin Liu, Tsinghua University: Social capital building as an informal process of social cohesion for
marginalized population in China
Dr. Yang Xiao, Tongji University: An assessment of urban park access in Shanghai – implications for social equity
of marginalized groups in urban China
Dr. Yuan Yuan, Sun Yat-Sen University: Collaborative mechanism in urban_planning of low-income comminuty

Abstract Index #: 271
RE-FRAMING NARRATIVES OF DECLINE WITH GIS
Abstract System ID#: 571
Poster
MURDOCH, James [University of Texas at Arlington] murdochj@uta.edu
Local municipalities often construct narratives of decline to describe neighborhood targeted for redevelopment
and revitalization that can obscure how local residents themselves feel and think about, as well as use, their
neighborhoods. This can lead to ineffective strategies, or perhaps worse, strategies that exclude and harm the
very population meant to benefit the most. In this paper, I argue that qualitative GIS is particularly useful in
constructing alternative narratives of neighborhood that can reflect a more localized, nuanced, and asset-based
approach. The basis for this argument comes from a modified version of feminist standpoint theory, which argues
that knowledge is constructed from individual standpoints or “combinations of resources available within a
specific context” and thus always “partial, local, and historically specific” (Sprague, 2005, p. 41). The use of this
epistemological base facilitates the argument that there is no one true narrative of what a neighborhood is, but
rather multiple and perhaps conflicting representations. To demonstrate my argument, I provide a case study of
my own neighborhood in Arlington, Texas that is in the beginning stages of plans for redevelopment. I use my
specialized knowledge as a PhD student in urban_planning to construct visual representations using GIS of how

the city might see my neighborhood and contrast these with visual representations of how I see my
neighborhood as a local resident.
References
 Sprague, J. (2005). Seeing through science: epistemologies. In Feminist methodologies for critical
researchers: Bridging differences (pp. 31-52). Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.

Abstract Index #: 272
MILLENNIALS IN GENTRIFICATION: CINCINNATI'S OVER-THE-RHINE (OTR) IN THE MILLENNIUM
Abstract System ID#: 578
Poster
KIM, Jongwoong [University of Cincinnati] kim2jw@mail.uc.edu
The justification of inner city gentrification has been widely debated across the fields of planning and geography,
with scholars such as Lance Freeman and Loretta Lees trying to appraise its complicated process and
controversial outcomes (Freeman 2006; Lees 2000). Dowell Myers, a demographer and planner, informs us of
the impending future of our city to be impacted by a surging population of millennials – those who were born in
between 1981 and 1997 – in these area (Myers 2014). However, the scholarly works in the fields have not
specifically addressed the issue of inner city gentrification with regard to the actual and likely impact from this
emerging demographic cohort, along with the facilitating functions of city government and institutions
(Mossberger and Stoker 2001). My paper addresses the issue of inner city gentrification with special attention to
the role and motivations of millennial residents and the facilitating efforts from city government and institutions
to cement their sustained residences. Specifically, in my project, I will be looking at the millennials who moved in
Over-the-Rhine (OTR), Cincinnati after 2000, in order to investigate their role and motivations in the process of
gentrification. I will discuss these in line with the project and policy initiatives from the city government and local
institutions in order to reveal the dynamics between them and the residents in the process. OTR, a historic
neighborhood adjacent to the downtown Cincinnati, has experienced accelerating gentrification based on a
number of real estate development and financing projects particularly after the riots in 2001 and the subsequent
establishment of Cincinnati Center City Development Corporation (3CDC) in 2003. I argue that the millennials
who moved in OTR since the early 2000s may have played a major role in accelerating the gentrification of
neighborhood, looking for an affordable urban lifestyle with job/business opportunities while helping strengthen
the “revitalized” sense of community by actively participating community engagement program. While the city
government has exercised the typical economic and community development strategies in the downtown such as
tax breaks for the major corporation branches/headquarters and large-scale construction of amenities (e.g.,
renovated stadiums), private non-profit organizations like 3CDC whose board of directors is primarily composed
of personnel from the major corporations like Proctor & Gamble (P&G) would have made more specialized
efforts to attract and retain young talents in the area, by facilitating the transformation of OTR into a more
favorable place for the millennials to live and sustain their residences. In conclusion, this project, by closely
examining the role and motivations of the millennial residents in OTR, Cincinnati in the process of neighborhood
gentrification, sheds new light on the rarely acknowledged issue of inner city gentrification in regard to the
surging population cohort and the major stakeholders/facilitators in the city, all of whom are much responsible
for the impending future of our city. [465 words]
*This research was undertaken independent of collaboration or supervision with a faculty member.
References
 Freeman, Lance. There Goes the Hood: Views of Gentrification from the Ground Up. Philadelphia, PA:
Temple University Press, 2006.
 Lees, Loretta. "A Reappraisal of Gentrification: towards a ‘geography of gentrification’." Progress in
Human Geography, 2000: 389-408.
 Mossberger, Karen, and Gerry Stoker. "The Evolution of Urban Regime Theory: The Challenge of
Conceptualization." Urban Affairs Review, 2001: 810-835.



Myers, Dowell, interview by Bipartisan Policy Center. Housing Summit Series: Dowell Myers (June 26,
2014).

Abstract Index #: 273
EXPLORING THE NEIGHBORHOOD REDEVELOPMENT EFFECTS ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY VALUES:
Abstract System ID#: 595
Individual Paper
XU, Minjie [Texas A & M University] mxu@neo.tamu.edu, presenting author, primary author
LEE, Chanam [Texas A&M University] chanam@tamu.edu
SAGINOR, Jesse [Texas A&M University] jsaginor@tamu.edu
Background: Urban sprawl has accelerated the decline of inner city. It has also shown to be linked with the
prevalence of auto-dependent, sedentary lifestyles and obesity (Ewing et al., 2008), accompanying serious
economic, social, and health burdens. Many planning movements and initiatives have been attempted to reverse
this trend, and Tax Increment Financing (TIF) is one of the most common urban redevelopment approaches used
by local governments. While recent studies identified the significant association between TIF developments and
residential property values, their causal relationship has not been clearly examined.
Objectives: This study developed a quasi-experimental design to establish causal inference between TIF effects
and Single-Family (SF) property values, while sweeping out the price effects of time-constant omitted variables.
Pre-crisis (2008) and post-crisis (2014) appraised values were utilized to minimize the impact of financial crisis in
assessing potential property appreciation. Analyzing the six-year difference of 8,567 SF home property values in
12 TIF districts and their corresponding comparison neighborhood in the City of Dallas, Texas, this study
investigates the following aims: (1) Are there significant TIF effects associated with SF property values? (2) Are SF
homes located in TIF districts valued more than those in comparison neighborhood? (3) If yes, is it because of
the built environment improvements facilitated by TIF designation, or the residential locations retaining the
premiums?
Method: This study first identified appropriate comparison neighborhood for the 12 TIF districts selected for this
study, based on socioeconomic status,  land_use pattern, area/size, and location. Following the propensity score
matching (PSM) method and GIS analysis, one to several Census block groups were identified to have suitable
matches. Each SF home in TIF districts was matched with the most “identical” one in comparison neighborhood.
Then, by adopting Average Treatment Effects (ATE) method, the difference in mean property values between the
treatment group and the control group was assessed as the “true” impact of TIF designation on property values
during the six-year period. A binary logit model, PSM, two-way ANOVA, and ATE analysis were conducted to
address the three proposed research aims.
Results: The average value appreciation from 2008 to 2014 for SF homes in TIF districts and comparison
neighborhoods were $30,026 and -$9624. For Aim 1, the binary logit model indicated higher property values
were significantly associated with the SF homes located in TIF districts; For Aim 2, the ATE was estimated to be
$37,000. That is, after controlling building attributes and residential locations, the value appreciation of SF homes
in TIF was $37,000 more than their counterparts in comparison neighborhood. For Aim 3, the value appreciation
attributable to residential locations and building attributes was shown to be much smaller than the TIF-related
value appreciation ($2,650 compared to $37,000).
Conclusion: Existing evidence on the economic benefits of TIF has been inconsistent. This case-comparison study
adds to this body of literature by providing new evidence of causality validity to support the significant role of
TIFs in increasing SF property values. The key question is how to apply this tool appropriately to the
neighborhoods where the need is greatest. There are arguments that TIF is somewhat overused and has become
associated with political favoritism. The spillover effects burden the public services in nearby neighborhood
without reimbursement, while the redevelopment itself drives out lower-income people leading to gentrification.
However, in the current era of economic uncertainty and fiscal constraints, TIF is still a powerful tool to deliver a

stronger local economic future, while improving the built environments to promote active living and sustainable
communities for urban residents.
References
 Kuminoff, N. V., Parmeter, C. F., & Pope, J. C. (2010). Which hedonic models can we trust to recover the
marginal willingness to pay for environment amenities? Journal of environment economics and
management, 60(3), 145-160.
 Cao, X. J., Xu, Z., & Fan, Y. (2010). Exploring the connections among residential location, self-selection,
and driving: Propensity score matching with multiple treatments. Transportation research part A: policy
and practice, 44(10), 797-805.
 Rodríguez, D. A., Khattak, A. J., & Evenson, K. R. (2006). Can new Urbanism encourage physical activity?:
Comparing a new Urbanist neighborhood with conventional suburbs. Journal of the American Planning
Association, 72(1), 43-54.
 Ewing, R., Schmid, T., Killingsworth, R., Zlot, A., & Raudenbush, S. (2008). Relationship between urban
sprawl and physical activity, obesity, and morbidity Urban Ecology (pp. 567-582): Springer.
 Weber, R., Bhatta, S. D., & Merriman, D. (2007). Spillovers from tax increment financing districts:
Implications for housing price appreciation. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 37(2), 259-281.

Abstract Index #: 274
FOUNDATIONS IN THE DRIVER'S SEAT: WHAT WE LEARN FROM DETROIT ABOUT COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
WHEN THE THIRD SECTOR DRIVES PLANNING PROCESSES
Abstract System ID#: 597
Pre-organized Session: Learning from Detroit
BOCKMEYER, Janice [City University of New York - John Jay College] jbockmeyer@jjay.cuny.edu
Detroit is one of a growing number of previously industrial city globally that is using visioning and strategic land
use planning through collaborative governance to steer in a new direction. Research on collaborative governance
has found successful approaches ranging from governmentally directed community planning efforts (Sirianni
2009) to successful community-government partnerships such as the Nagasaki Model (Yahagi 2014). Detroit edging toward bankruptcy proceedings and exhibiting weakened governmental capacity at the start of its
collaborative planning effort - presents a unique case study to understand collaborative planning without an able
public partner. Building on Ansell and Gash (2007), this paper argues that an imbalance in the power of
stakeholders undermines collaborative governance. In the case of Detroit collaborative strategic  land_use
planning, community nonprofits can be expected to see diminished voice in the collaboration when the public
sector fails to play a strong mediating role.
In the absence of a strong public partner, this paper details the rise of the Third Sector in Detroit downtown and
community planning and its emergence as lead authority in a comprehensive Detroit strategic  land_use plan.
From the creation of a 501(c)(3) within the city's primary public benefits corporation (PBC) to receive
philanthropic funding, to the governance framework for Detroit Future City, the paper describes the
institutionalization of national, regional and local philanthropies in Detroit planning processes. Philanthropic
collaboratives, informal networking and public-private hybrid agencies are assessed for their role in changing land
use planning governance. The paper focuses on the leadership role that several dominant foundations played in
Detroit Works Project/Detroit Future City agenda-setting, decision making and implementation. Finally, it asks
what impact the ascendance of the Philanthropic Sector in planning has on the participation of community
residents and community nonprofit organizations. It argues that we learn from Detroit what to expect when the
public role in  land_use planning is diminished.
References
 Ansell, Chris and Alison Gash. (2007). Collaborative Governance in Theory and Practice. Journal of Public
Administration Research and Theory 18: 543-571.




Sirianni, Carmen. (2009). Investing in Democracy: Engaging Citizens in Collaborative Governance.
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
Yahagi, Hiroshi. (2014). The Nagasaki Model of Community Governance: Grassroots Partnership with
Local Government. In Shrinking city: International Perspectives and Policy Implications, edited by
Karina Pallagst, Thorsten Wiechmann and Christina Martinez-Fernandez, 147-163. New York: Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 275
ASIAN AMERICAN HOUSING BURDEN IN HIGH-PERFORMANCE SCHOOL DISTRICTS
Abstract System ID#: 610
Individual Paper
LEE, C. Aujean [University of California, Los Angeles] aujean@ucla.edu
Planners need to understand what  impact housing choice because these decisions affect access to various
opportunities. As Tiebout (1956) theorized, neighborhood offer a bundle of public goods (e.g., access to public
transportation, parks, police); people move to neighborhood that match not only their preferred public goods,
but also the taxes that they are willing to pay.
Schools may then serve as an important factor when families decide to move. Educational opportunities are
particularly important because of the geographical disparities in school quality. While schools can be considered
a public good because all children attend and their attendance does not preclude others from attending, highperformance schools are partial public goods because they are typically located in neighborhood with high
housing costs. Thus, only some parents can afford to live in these districts and send their children to these
schools. However, there also may be racial or ethnic differences in how much they are willing to pay for highquality schools.
My project seeks to answer if Californian Asian American parents pay more for housing relative to their income to
live in neighborhood with high-performance schools. It builds on previous work (Ong, Patraporn, & Tran, 2013),
which showed that a greater proportion of Asian Americans take on more housing burden. Also, Ogbu (1987)
theorized that voluntary immigrants, of whom he including Asian Americans, connect school achievement to
social mobility. I hypothesize that Asian American parents are willing to pay higher housing costs relative to their
incomes to enable their children to enroll in high-performance schools. According to economic value theory, if a
person prefers a particular good, the person is wiling to use more of their income to obtain this good as a tradeoff of other goods.
This paper uses secondary data analysis of California Department of Education Academic Performance Index (API)
scores, American Community Survey, and Decennial Census data to estimate income, home value, and
race/ethnic group data. Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data will also provide information on loans, loan
performance, and racial background of borrowers by census tract. I will use ArcGIS to match census tract data
with school districts. A regression model will be used to then determine any statistically significant relationships
between racial/ethnic background and housing burden in high-performance school districts.
The findings will help understand if Asian Americans on average have lower incomes and greater housing burden
than other groups in high-performance school districts. The study also has implications about the greater
financial risk with more housing burden. Additionally, it will show spatial differences in housing burden and
riskier loans in the state by racial/ethnic group. Finally, there are implications for wealth, as housing is the largest
source of wealth for most racial minority groups (Taylor et al., 2009).
References
 Ogbu, J. (1987). Variability in minority school performance: A problem in search of an explanation.
Anthropology and Education Quarterly, 18(4), 312-334.






Ong, P. M., Tran, D. L., & Patraporn, R. V. (2013). Asian American homeownership and foreclosure in East
San Gabriel Valley: An analysis of a Los Angeles community. Los Angeles: UCLA Asian American Studies
Center. Retrieved from http://www.aasc.ucla.edu/besol/UCLA_BESOL_ESGV.pdf.
Tiebout, C. (1956). A pure theory of local expenditures. The Journal of Political Economy, 64(5), 416-424.
Taylor, P., Kochhar, R., Fry, R., Velasco, G., & Motel, S. (2011). Wealth gaps rise to record highs between
Whites, Blacks and Hispanics. Washington, D.C.: Pew Research Center.

Abstract Index #: 276
RESHAPING LOS ANGELES: HOUSING AFFORDABILITY AND NEIGHBORHOOD CHANGE
Abstract System ID#: 621
Pre-organized Session: Millennials in the City: Trends and Forecasts
MAWHORTER, Sarah [University of Southern California] smawhort@usc.edu
As the population of the Los Angeles area has grown and changed over the last several decades, its housing
supply has become increasingly constrained. Housing opportunities have narrowed, especially for young people
trying to enter the housing market. With limited housing options, first immigrants and then millennials have
intensified the competition for housing in central urban neighborhood and inner ring suburbs. The shifting
patterns of where young people live have led to dramatic demographic and socioeconomic changes in
neighborhoods across Los Angeles. In this paper I address the questions of how changes in the population and
housing supply since 1990 have affected the affordability of quality housing and neighborhood for young people
in the Los Angeles area, and how young people have in turn transformed neighborhood.
Los Angeles’ dynamic economy and laid back culture have had enduring appeal for diverse groups of people.
During the 1990s, Los Angeles attracted substantial numbers of immigrants and baby boomers moving from
other states. Millennials (children of immigrants and baby boomers alike) surged into the housing market in the
past decade. At the same time, undeveloped land became scarce and financing for new construction dried up
over the course of the housing boom and bust. Now Los Angeles faces strong demand for housing with an aging
housing stock, stringent planning regulations, and deep opposition to new development.
I analyze changes in housing opportunities and outcomes for various demographic groups in Los Angeles County
during the 1990s and 2000s. I define groups by educational attainment and age; race and ethnicity and age; and
immigrant status and year of arrival, paying special attention to young adults and recent immigrants. I measure
changes in the housing and neighborhood characteristics of opportunities and outcomes for each group, using
1990 and 2000 Decennial Census data and the 2005-07, 2008-10, and 2011-13 American Community Surveys. I
then compare the housing opportunities and outcomes between groups and between time periods for each
group.
Further, I develop a new method to measure housing opportunities separately from housing outcomes. I
distinguish opportunities from outcomes because opportunities are largely determined by factors external to a
household, while outcomes are determined by household choices made within the structure of the housing
market. I define housing opportunities as housing available on the market that has not been claimed by higher
income households. Available housing depends on new construction as well as previous residents’ decisions to
move. Within the supply of available housing, opportunities are affected by competition between households. By
contrast, housing outcomes depend on actual choices of neighborhood and housing units, as well as decisions
about household formation, residential mobility, migration, tenure, and housing affordability levels. Outcomes
may not match opportunities because people may decide to spend more of their income to compete for better
housing. Alternatively, people may decide to double up or move out of the area altogether if they cannot afford
housing that meets their needs. Measuring opportunities separately from outcomes gives a sense of the limited
options people have and the compromises people make to afford housing.
This research provides planners with a detailed understanding of the interplay between demographic change and
housing development. Los Angeles serves as a relevant example of the changes in population and housing that

have led to affordable housing shortages in many other large U.S. metropolitan area. Because these trends
began earlier in Los Angeles than most area, it holds clues about the future of urban development. By
understanding how these processes have reshaped the housing market in Los Angeles, planners can design better
policies to alleviate affordable housing shortages and meet future housing needs.
References
 De Souza Briggs, Xavier N. 2005. The Geography of Opportunity: Race and Housing Choice in
Metropolitan America. Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
 Ellen, Ingrid Gould, and Katherine M. O’Regan. 2011. “How Low Income neighborhood Change: Entry,
Exit, and Enhancement.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 41 (2): 89–97.
 Galster, George C., and Jerome Rothenberg. 1991. “Filtering in Urban Housing: A Graphical Analysis of a
Quality-Segmented Market.” Journal of Planning Education and Research 11 (1): 37–50.
 Matlack, Janna L., and Jacob L. Vigdor. 2008. “Do Rising Tides Lift All Prices? Income Inequality and
Housing Affordability.” Journal of Housing Economics 17 (3): 212–24.
 Myers, Dowell, and John Pitkin. 2009. “Demographic Forces and Turning Points in the American City,
1950-2040.” The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 626: 91–111.

Abstract Index #: 277
COMMUNITY FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH UNMET HOUSING NEEDS OF OWNERS VS. RENTERS DURING
DISASTER: CASE STUDY OF HURRICANES KATRINA AND RITA
Abstract System ID#: 645
Individual Paper
LEE, Jee Young [Texas A&M University] jlee2007@tamu.edu, presenting author, primary author
BAME, Sherry [Texas A&M University] sbame@tamu.edu
Although housing needs prior to a disaster can exaggerate post-disaster housing needs, limited research has
investigated housing needs throughout disaster phases. This study synthesized literature and provided a
conceptual model for understanding unmet housing needs prior to, during, and after hurricane disasters.
Measures of housing affordability, availability, and quality were significant in previous research examining
housing needs during normal, non-disaster times. In addition, the model included disaster location and disaster
phase to control for a disaster’s impact on housing needs. A unique feature of this analysis was to differentiate
between homeowners and renters unmet housing needs.
The data regarding unmet housing needs, location, and time were obtained from the Texas 2-1-1 dataset of calls
from August 1 throughout December 31, 2005. The 2-1-1 system is a 3-digit phone number similar to 9-1-1, but
dedicated to non-emergency community needs. The 2-1-1 Texas Information and Referral Network has been
used as a communication hub during disasters not only for routine community needs, but also for disasterrelated needs and updating availability of social support services. These 2-1-1 data were collected from Texas’ 25
autonomous Area Information Centers. Of the total 2-1-1 calls (N=635,983) during the 5-month study period,
180,601 were housing-related, of which 59% were rental issues and 10% were owner-related. The individual 2-11 housing-related calls were aggregated by county (N=254 Texas counties) according to whether there were any
calls in that county for unmet housing needs from homeowners and from renters during that disaster phase.
The independent measures of housing affordability, availability and quality were similar to previous research
models using U.S. Census and Housing and Urban Development (HUD) public access databases, then aggregated
to the county level. Disaster county location was determined by FEMA’s declaration of the Hurricane Rita disaster
area in Texas. Four disaster phases were established: a) four weeks prior to Hurricane Katrina, b) three weeks
during Hurricane Katrina landfall and sheltering, c) four weeks during evacuation, landfall and sheltering for
Hurricane Rita, and d) three months recovery post-Hurricane Rita. The multivariate model was analyzed using
logistic regression for each disaster phase for homeowners and for renters.

The findings indicated that housing affordability and availability factors had substantial  impact on the likelihood
of homeowner and renter unmet housing needs, whereas housing quality showed no significant relationship
throughout the disaster phases. For homeowners, housing market affordability barriers were significant prior to
Hurricane Katrina, but not after the hurricane disasters began. For renters, increased affordability barriers were
associated with greater unmet needs during all disaster phases except for the recovery phase. Hence,
homeowners may have been better equipped to meet their housing needs or had greater access to disasterrelated financial support program than renters. Unmet housing needs of both owners and renters were
significantly greater in larger urban area during both hurricanes’ emergency phases. Unmet renters’ needs were
greater in urban area during recovery. Controlling for housing density throughout all disaster phases, a lower
vacancy rate for housing units was significantly associated with greater unmet housing needs for both
homeowners and renters. As expected, disaster area had a greater likelihood of unmet housing needs for both
owners and renters during Hurricane Rita.
Policymakers should understand that different factors relate to the unmet housing needs of owners compared to
renters, and that these vary according to disaster phase. Consequently, different strategies and program are
needed during each disaster phase, and such program should be targeted to renters differently than
homeowner program.
References
 Belsky, E. S., Goodman, J., & Drew, R. (2005). Measuring the nation's rental housing affordability
problems. Cambridge, MA: Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University.
 Burby, R. J., Steinberg, L. J., & Basolo, V. (2003). The tenure trap: The vulnerability of renters to joint
natural and technological disasters. Urban Affairs Review, 39(1), 32–58.
 Comerio, M. C. (1997). Housing issues after disasters. Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management,
5(3), 166–178.
 Elliott, J. R., & Pais, J. (2006). Race, class, and Hurricane Katrina: Social differences in human responses to
disaster. Social Science Research, 35(2), 295–321.
 Zhang, Y., & Peacock, W. G. (2010). Planning for housing recovery? Lessons learned from Hurricane
Andrew. Journal of the American Planning Association, 76(1), 5–24.

Abstract Index #: 278
‘YOU’RE CLOSING A FAMILY DOWN’: CALLING OUT RELATIONAL TIES TO PROTEST SCHOOL CLOSURES IN
PHILADELPHIA neighborhood
Abstract System ID#: 670
Pre-organized Session: Considering Schools in Community Development
GOOD, Ryan [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] ryan.good@rutgers.edu
In this paper, I explore how local stakeholders situated schools within neighborhood social networks in protesting
the closure of public schools in Philadelphia in 2013. In so doing, parents, students, teachers, and community
leaders attested to schools’ local significance, revealing the ways schools are embedded in space through webs of
local relationships. This place-rooted representation of schools sits in striking contrast to the aspatial surplus of
seats invoked by officials in justifying school closures.
In December 2012, the School District of Philadelphia (SDP) recommended closing approximately one out of
every six schools across the city. The District argued that the infrastructural contraction was a necessary piece in
the larger puzzle of closing a gaping budget deficit. A 25% drop in enrollment between 2002 and 2012, due
largely to charter school expansion and demographic shifts, left many traditional public schools severely underenrolled. The costs of maintaining and heating half-empty buildings had become untenable, and SDP officials
argued that in order to survive as a school district, they had to eliminate 53,000 “empty seats” across the city.
However, framing the SDP’s facilities issue in terms of a surplus of seats obscures the spatial reality of schools.
Schools are operated in buildings that sit in neighborhood. A school’s location has bearing on who can attend

that school, and, in practice, culling thousands of “seats” involves closing specific schools that sit in specific
neighborhoods, differentially affecting comminuty across the city.
In this paper, I examine the ways neighborhood stakeholders’ contestation of school closures rooted schools in
local social landscapes. This research (1) traces the relationships between schools and local comminuty—
relationships obscured by aspatial markets of seats (Witten, Kearns, Lewis, Coster, & McCreanor, 2003); (2)
reveals schools to be embedded in the socially and politically contested neighborhood where they sit (Deeds &
Pattillo, 2014; Lipman & Haines, 2007); and (3) theorizes the leveraging of local community identities in broader
political engagement and planning processes (Martin, 2003; Mele, 2000).
This paper’s findings sit within a larger dissertation project, in which I am studying the multiple ways local
stakeholders in three Philadelphia neighborhood invoked place-rooted arguments in contesting the proposed
closure of public schools in their neighborhood. Data collection consists primarily of in-depth, semi-structured
interviews with neighborhood stakeholders, including parents, residents, teachers, community leaders, clergy,
and local politicians. Additionally, I draw on video records of community meetings facilitated by the SDP between
the December 2012 announcement of closure recommendations and the March 2013 final decisions.
Better understanding the politics that tether schools to local comminuty will help both school districts and
residents navigate the restructuring of public school system in ways that more equitably share the costs and
consequences of those changes. My work contributes to theory in planning and geography that explores the
production of place and the intersection of such processes with contested claims to urban space. This line of
research also frames an arena for planning practice to engage the intersections of community development,
neighborhood inequality, and public education.
References
 Deeds, V., & Pattillo, M. (2014). Organizational “failure” and institutional pluralism: A case study of an
urban school closure. Urban Education. doi:10.1177/0042085913519337
 Lipman, P., & Haines, N. (2007). From accountability to privatization and African American exclusion:
Chicago’s “Renaissance 2010.” Educational Policy, 21(3), 471–502.
 Martin, D. G. (2003). “Place-framing” as place-making: Constituting a neighborhood for organizing and
activism. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 93(3), 730–750.
 Mele, C. (2000). Selling the Lower East Side: Culture, real estate, and resistance in New York City.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
 Witten, K., Kearns, R., Lewis, N., Coster, H., & McCreanor, T. (2003). Educational restructuring from a
community viewpoint: A case study of school closure from Invercargill, New Zealand. Environment and
Planning C: Government and Policy, 21(2), 203–223.

Abstract Index #: 279
DOES INCLUSIONARY ZONING REDUCE SEGREGATION?
Abstract System ID#: 677
Individual Paper
LI, Fei [New York University] fei.li@nyu.edu
Large public housing projects have been found to contribute to the concentration of poverty and persistent
segregation, leading to the deterioration of neighborhood and quality of life. To alleviate inner city problems
associated with the concentration of public housing, the recent few decades have seen a shift from large scale
public production of low-income housing to more decentralized, quality-oriented affordable housing policy. One
strategy that has gained increasing popularity is inclusionary zoning (IZ), which requires or incentivizes private
developers to produce affordable housing along with market-rate housing developments. While IZ aims at both
increasing affordable housing supply and creating mixed-income, socially sustainable neighborhood, few have
examined how IZ program have achieved the latter goal. The lack of empirical evidence is partly due to data

limitations and the varied features of local IZ program in the US (Schuetz et al., 2009, 2011), which make it
difficult to derive meaningful conclusions on the effectiveness of IZ from cross-jurisdiction comparisons.
This study explores the desegregation effect of IZ by examining a mandatory IZ scheme in London, U.K., which has
been established by a series of national policy in the 1990s. A micro-level housing production dataset from the
Greater London Authority with development specific information, including addresses, allows a close-up
examination of where the affordable units are built. The paper compares the distribution of affordable housing
provided by private developers through the IZ scheme and that of market-rate housing units, as well as the
placement of traditional public housing provided by local authorities or social landlords. It then tests the linkage
between the share of affordable housing in market-rate developments and neighborhood characteristics. Two
research questions are asked. 1) Is the production of affordable housing through IZ truly neighborhood neutral?
Or, are affordable units still concentrated in poor, low opportunity area? 2) Is the distribution of affordable
housing produced through IZ more equitable than that of traditional public housing projects? The results would
shed light on the effectiveness of mandatory IZ in reducing residential income segregation and provide muchneeded evidence for the ongoing discussion over the adoption of mandatory IZ in other parts of the world,
including many U.S. city.
References
 Crump, J. (2002). Deconcentration by demolition: public housing, poverty, and urban policy.
Environment and Planning D, 20(5), 581-596.
 Lerman, B. R. (2006). Mandatory inclusionary zoning-the answer to the affordable housing problem. BC
Envtl. Aff. L. Rev., 33, 383.
 Schuetz, Jenny, Rachel Meltzer and Vicki Been, 2009. 31 Flavor of Inclusionary Zoning. Journal of the
American Planning Association, 75(4), 441-456.
 Schuetz, Jenny, Rachel Meltzer and Vicki Been, 2011. Silver Bullet or Trojan Horse? The Effects of
Inclusionary Zoning on Local Housing Markets in the United States. Urban Studies, 48(2), 297-329.

Abstract Index #: 280
UNDERSTANDING THE LONG-TERM EFFECT OF GOVERNMENT HOUSING REGULATIONS ON SPATIAL
DISTRIBUTION OF PUBLIC HOUSING DWELLERS: A CASE STUDY OF SINGAPORE
Abstract System ID#: 680
Individual Paper
SHAW, Jingsi [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] xujs@mit.edu, presenting author, primary author
FERREIRA, Joseph [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] jf@mit.edu
One commonly observed issue in the vast majority of Asian city is economic growth that pushes land prices up,
especially in urban and inner-city area. Consequently, low- and middle-income households are priced out of land
markets. As affordable housing in Asia is a serious and considerable challenge, governments have implemented
housing programmes, policy and institutional arrangements to provide a range of affordable housing
alternatives. To assist policymakers with evaluating urban development policy and anticipating trends in the
evolution of city, researchers have significantly improved modern urban land-use-and-transportation (LUT)
models (Miller et al. 1998; Waddell, 2002). However, few studies focus on the long-term effect of government
housing regulations on the spatial distribution of residents. Key reasons include the lack of longitudinal data with
spatial details for demographic groups, and limited modeling strategies to handle the interaction between
housing policy and households’ residential relocation choices. As a result, policy makers and planners have
limited tools for testing the spatial consequences of government intervention in housing markets after several
cycles of slow/fast economic growth and demographic shifts. In order to fill the gap, this study uses Singapore as
a case to examine whether the rules are significant enough to impact household residential relocation choices in
ways that have long-term spatial and demographic consequences.
Singapore has heavy government control over the housing markets, through direct construction and strict
eligibility rules for public housing. During the past few decades, public housing projects, together with public

housing policy, have enabled home ownership for the majority of Singaporeans (Saxona, 2011). Meanwhile,
Singapore has a wealth of demographic, transport, real estate and infrastructure data, much of it with rich spatial
detail. These data provide a rich test bed in which to investigate the long-term effect of government intervention
in the spatial distribution of Singaporean households.
By using the Singaporean census data from 1990, 2000 and 2010, we find that some neighborhood exhibit
demographic bulge that is certain demographic groups are overrepresented in certain neighborhood compared
with the Singapore total. More interestingly, these bulges persist across several decades. In particular, the elderly
become more concentrated in the central region, whereas young children become more clustered in the
peripheral regions. On the one hand, individuals’ moving behavior is consistent with research in other market
contexts (Clark and Dieleman, 1996). On the other hand, given that a significant number of households that enjoy
eligibility priority according to their life course stages move to newly built public housing towns each year, public
housing towns built in different years exhibit distinct age compositions. For example, for a public housing town
built between 1970 and 1979, the population bulge appears at the age groups 55 and over. This indicates that the
spatial concentration of age groups could be an indirect outcome of the interaction between market and
governmental forces.
Furthermore, the question that how government housing regulations may expand or limit the opportunities to
move for individuals is not well understood and has not been studied yet. In order to answer this question, we
conduct a survey targeting on recent movers in Singapore—people whose households changed residential
location in the last two years. By utilizing the new dataset, we will build several practical Markov Chain models to
model the lifecycle experience of households with key events that trigger consideration of moving and their
housing bundle choices, including tenure, housing types, and location, and then replicate the observed
demographic bulges of certain age groups. The results will provide us with a better understanding that to what
extent the persistency of demographic bulges of certain age groups would account for the regulatory effect on
households’ residential relocation choices.
References
 Clark, W.A.V. and F.M. Dieleman. 1996. Households and Housing: Choice and Outcomes in the Housing
Market, CUPR Press, Rutgers University, New Jersey.
 Miller, Eric J., David S. Kriger, and John Douglas Hunt. 1998. Integrated Urban Models for Simulation of
Transit and Land-Use policy. TCRP Project H-12 (Final Report).
 Saxena, N.C. 2011. Virtuous Cycles: The Singapore Public Service and National Development. United
Nations Development Programme.
 Waddell, Paul. 2002. UrbanSim: Modeling Urban Development for  land_use, Transportation and
Environmental Planning. Journal of the American Planning Association. Vol. 68: 297-314.

Abstract Index #: 281
“WELFARE REFORM” COMES TO PUBLIC HOUSING - HOW DO RESIDENTS PERCEIVE SELF-SUFFICIENCY
REFORMS?
Abstract System ID#: 685
Individual Paper
FRESCOLN, Kirstin [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] kirstinf@live.unc.edu, presenting author, primary
author
WEBB, Michael [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] mdwebb@unc.edu
ROHE, William [Univ. of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] brohe@unc.edu
How can housing authorities effectively support economic self-sufficiency outcomes? From an early social work
intervention at St. Louis’ Pruitt-Igoe in the 1960s to the development of the Family Self-Sufficiency program
(FSS) in the 1980s, local housing authorities have struggled to find an effective combination of policy and
programs to encourage greater work efforts among tenants (Freeman, 1998; Kleit, 2004; Planmatics, Inc, DeSilva,
& Wijewardena, 2011; Popkin, Susan & McDaniel, Marla, 2013; Rohe & Kleit, 1999; Shroder, 2002). The most

recent efforts have been implemented as part of the Moving to Work (MTW) demonstration which requires
participating to agencies to test innovations that will support economic self-sufficiency amongst work-able
tenants. Freed from most HUD regulations, MTW agencies are able to test controversial policy such as time
limits and work requirements in addition to less contentious ones such as targeted incentive accounts and rent
reforms which encourage increased work efforts (Webb, MD, Frescoln, KP, & Rohe, WM, 2014).
As part of its MTW participation, the Charlotte Housing Authority has implemented; incentive accounts, rent
reforms including biennial income recertification and banded rent, and a pilot work requirement with supportive
case management for work-able tenants at five public housing sites. Using data from longitudinal interviews with
public housing residents, we explore (i) residents’ understanding of economic self-sufficiency, (ii) the role public
housing plays in helping them become economically self-sufficient, and (iii) their perceptions of the housing
authority’s rent reforms, work requirement, and case management interventions. More specifically, the research
addresses how residents perceive the various self-sufficiency initiatives implemented - which program(s)
motivate them to improve their education and/or increase their work efforts? Results can inform existing policy
debates such as: Should housing authorities prioritize requiring residents to work or removing barriers to work?
Are sanctions, such as rent increases and possible eviction, more effective than incentives like escrow accounts
and rent reforms that delay or otherwise lessen the impact of increased wages on tenant rent calculations? What
are the unintended and collateral consequences of enforcing a work requirement on a population that is
predominately single, black, women with dependent children?
HUD calls the Moving to Work demonstration, “America’s Housing Policy Lab;” self-sufficiency policy tested by
MTW agencies and deemed “successful” may become national HUD policy. Housing authorities play an essential
role in supporting some of our nation’s most vulnerable individuals and families. Identifying best-practices in
helping work-able individuals become economically self-sufficient is important not only to the families helped but
also to those stuck on often-lengthy wait lists. As housing authorities test welfare reform-like policy such as
work requirements and time limits, it is critical that policy makers learn how residents perceive and react to these
reforms so that the policy and program enacted achieve their intent.
References
 Freeman, L. (1998). Interpreting the dynamics of public housing: Cultural and rational choice
explanations. Housing Policy Debate, 9(2), 323–353. doi:10.1080/10511482.1998.9521297
 Planmatics, Inc, DeSilva, L., & Wijewardena, I. (2011). Evaluation of the Family Self-Sufficiency Program:
Prospective Study. US Department of Housing and Urban Development.
 Popkin, Susan & McDaniel, Marla. (2013). HOST: Can Public Housing be a Platform for Change? (p. 23).
Chicago: Urban Institute.
 Shroder, M. D. (2002). Does housing assistance perversely affect self-sufficiency? A review essay. Journal
of Housing Economics, 11(4), 381–417.
 Webb, MD, Frescoln, KP, & Rohe, WM. (2014). Innovation in Public Housing: The Moving to Work
Demonstration. Chapel Hill, NC: Center for Urban and Regional Studies, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill.

Index #: 282
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT IN A TRANSITIONING SOCIETY: RELOCATION AND CONDOMINIUM HOUSING IN
ADDIS ABABA, ETHIOPIA
Abstract System ID#: 716
Individual Paper
WUBNEH, Mulatu [East Carolina University] wubnehe@gmail.com
Research on urban redevelopment and housing in many Western countries, primarily U.S., Canada and Britain
show that urban redevelopment or urban renewal program were undertaken to revitalize deteriorating
neighborhoods, to provide housing for the poor and to eliminate blight area. They are also criticized for having
displaced thousands of poor residents and warehousing them in public housing to make land available for

corporations. In recent years, urban renewal program that included relocation have also been undertaken to
deconcentrate poverty (Goetz 2003), eliminate public housing (Oakley and Ruel 2013 ), and implement
gentrification program (Newman, et. Al, 2006).
There is, however, very little work on the urban redevelopment experiences of less developed countries that
have recently transitioned from a socialist to market economy system. The few studies available concentrate on
the experiences of China and Vietnam and the focus seems to be on how these countries are privatizing their
land holding and housing system. Among African and Latin American countries, there is very little work done in
this area.
The objective of my paper is to help fill this gap by documenting the urban redevelopment experiences of
Ethiopia by focusing on the capital city Addis Ababa. After several decades of socialist rule, Ethiopia has
transitioned into a market economy. Some of the major urban development program the country faces include
the rise in population, the deterioration of infrastructure in many neighborhood, the issue of land ownership
and the crises in housing shortage. To address these problems, the Municipality of Addis Ababa adopted the land
lease and land auctioning system to rationalize land holding, raise capital to help revitalize the deteriorated
infrastructure of city, provide condominium homes (based on the experiences of Vietnam and China) to low and
middle income households and to attract private investment to build the central part of the city. The
Municipality of Addis Ababa has built over 80,000 condominium homes in 30 sites in the last ten years, and also
has relocated thousands of residents from the central city to the suburbs where the condominium are located.
The analysis will be based on a survey of households from three sites. The sample includes 300 families relocated
from the central part of the city into condominiums. The relocation program expects families to be able to front
between 10 to 30% of the down payment for the condominiums (depending on their choice – one or two or
three-bed room homes) and also qualify to get mortgage loan from a bank. Most of these residents did not have
the resources to come up with the down payment or qualify for mortgage loan. Yet, through social networks and
government guaranteed loan program many have succeeded in owning condominium homes. My paper will
focus on the experiences of these families, specifically as it relates to: (a) how the land lease and land auctioning
system impacted them; (b) how the municipality engaged them in the relocation process, i.e. the citizen
participation aspect; (b) how they were able to raise funds for down payment and also qualify to secure
mortgage, and (c) how the relocation program has affected their life, specifically as it relates to jobs,
transportation, social ties, school for children and safety for family. The analysis will compare their perspectives
in the old vs. new neighborhood on some of the neighborhood and housing characteristics.
References
 Goetz, Edward. 2010. Better neighborhood, better conditions? Explaining relocation outcomes in Hope
VI. Cityscape: Journal of Policy Development and Research. 12(1) , pp. 5-32
 Newman, K., Wyly, Elvin, K. 2006. The right to stay put, revisited gentrification and resistance to
displacement in NY City. Urban Studies. 43(1), pp. 23-27.
 Oakley, D., Ruel, E., 2013. Atlanta’s last demolition and relocations: The relationship between
neighborhood characteristics and resident satisfaction. Housing Studies, 1-30.

Abstract Index #: 283
DOES GENTRIFICATION AND DISPLACEMENT NEAR RAIL STATIONS INCREASE AUTO USE?
Abstract System ID#: 722
Pre-organized Session: Disadvantaged and Displaced in California
XU, Ruoying [University of California, Berkeley] xuruoying@berkeley.edu, presenting author
CHATMAN, Daniel [University of California, Berkeley] dgc@berkeley.edu, primary author
PARK, Janice [University of California, Berkeley] janice.park@berkeley.edu
SPEVACK, Anne [University of California, Berkeley] aspevack@berkeley.edu

Transit-oriented development (TOD) program are intended to boost transit ridership, walking, and cycling while
decreasing automobile use, by increasing dense, mixed-use housing development near transit stations. But it is
uncertain whether TODs actually reduce auto use on the whole, and research has suggested that reductions are
highly dependent on the characteristics of TOD (Chatman 2013). A related problem is the fact that transit
investments could cause gentrification and displacement, with an uncertain overall impact on auto use.
Automobile ownership and use usually increases when neighborhood gentrify (e.g. Pucher & Renne 2003).
Developing new housing near transit could have a marginal effect on net travel patterns or even increase auto
use overall, if it is followed by an influx of wealthier, car-owning families and a displacement of transit dependent
households who subsequently are forced to drive (e.g. Lund et al., 2004; Pollack et al., 2010). On the other hand,
if wealthier households moving into transit-rich area reduce their auto use —and, if poorer households moving
farther away still depend largely on alternative modes—then the net impact of gentrification and displacement
could be to decrease auto use, while also making the lives of poorer households more difficult.
This paper presents an empirical analysis of the relationship between household moves, rail proximity, income,
and auto use using datasets that include explicit information about household location as well as information
about the most recent move. We investigate the correlation of rail station proximity and household vehicle miles
traveled (VMT) using two different data sources, and both looking over time and accounting for the recency of
the household move.
Our first data source is the confidential version of the National Household Travel Survey (NHTS), which includes
2,583 California households in 2001 and 21,663 in 2009, along with a Census block group identifier allowing us to
measure transit proximity for each household. Our second data source is the confidential version of the California
Household Travel Survey (CHTS), with 42,431 households surveyed in 2010-2012. The confidential CHTS provides
a latitude-longitude pair for each household residence, allowing us to calculate transit proximity exactly; the year
of the household’s most recent move; and the zip code and city of the previous residence if the move was within
five years.
We have begun the analysis and have some preliminary findings. First, while people living within a half-mile of a
rail station drive less than those who live farther away, this effect is smaller in 2009 than in 2001, after a period
of gentrification that has generally occurred in our California dataset. Second, household income has a larger
positive correlation with VMT for those near transit than for those who live far from transit, also consistent with
the notion that lower income people reduce their auto use more than high income people in response to transit
accessibility.
We will continue to work with the data in refining this descriptive analysis, including investigating the locations
from which lower income and higher income households recently moved. Our final major analysis step will be to
carry out regressions controlling for the recency of the move, and for characteristics of the previous location, and
also carrying out regression analyses on subsets of the data such as those of lower income and higher income,
who have moved recently. This analysis will enable better inference as to the effects on VMT of people moving
near and far away from rail. Once complete, our study will add insight about the possible unintended
consequences of transit-oriented development, and will help guide TOD program and policy.
References
 Chatman, D. G. (2013). Does TOD need the T? On the importance of factors other than rail access.
Journal of the American Planning Association 79 (1): 17-31.
 Lund, H. M., Cervero, R., & Wilson, R. W. (2004). Travel characteristics of transit-oriented development
in California. CALTRANS transportation grants-“Statewide Planning Studies”. FTA session 5313 (b).
Pomona, CA.
 Pollack, S., Bluestone, B., & Billingham, C. (2010). Maintaining diversity in America’s transit-rich
neighborhoods: Tools for equitable neighborhood change. Dukakis Center for Urban and Regional Policy,
Northeastern University. Boston, MA.
 Pucher, J., & Renne, J. L. (2003). Socioeconomics of urban travel: evidence from the 2001 NHTS.
Transportation Quarterly, 57(3), 49-77.

Abstract Index #: 284
GENTRIFIERS OR COMMUNITY ANCHORS: ARE ART MUSEUMS GOOD FOR URBAN NEIGHBORHOOD
RESIDENTS?
Abstract System ID#: 727
Individual Paper
MEYER, Justin [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] justrm@umich.edu
My dissertation research examines how urban art museums impact their adjacent neighborhood to understand
when they contribute to the type of gentrification that displaces ethnic minorities and/or poorer households, and
when they might help ‘anchor’ or even build diverse comminuty. The results of my research suggest that an art
museum’s role in community development, rather than being predefined and fixed, very much depends on
metropolitan economic factors and the funding sources available.
Urban and museum academic literature view institutions like art museums in highly contradicting ways. ‘Classic’
critical urban theory views institutions like art museums as examples of how elite actors organize space for the
purposes of increasing land value (Harvey, 2001; Logan & Molotch, 1987) and/or maintaining a stratified urban
social hierarchy (Castells, 2002). This critical view of art museums frames them as part of a gentrification process
that often displaces and isolates ethnic minorities and poorer groups. Other theories frame art museums as
places that can actually help anchor urban neighborhood (Birch et al, 2013) and build comminuty (Gurian,
2001) by providing accessible space for social interaction and education.
To understand the museum-neighborhood relationship at different scales and through different perspectives, I
tracked socio-economic change in 92 census tract neighborhood adjacent to 31 nation-wide art museums in 21
cities using data from the 2000 and 2010 U.S. censuses. I also completed a 3-month, in-depth observation of an
urban art museum’s operations and programming decisions (the Portland Art Museum in Oregon), and I
conducted roughly 30 interviews with neighborhood constituents, real estate developers, and museum staff in
Portland, OR.
My analysis of census data indicates a strong connection between a city’s economy trajectory and whether an art
museum contributes to the gentrification of urban neighborhood or helps anchor them. The data from my case
study of Portland Art Museum (participant observation and interviews) describe how a city’s economy influences
the funding sources and programming decisions of an art museum, the relationships the museum forms with
outside groups, and how these programming decisions and relationships influence neighborhood residents. The
results of my research support two conclusions: 1) High growth urban area see increased investment from real
estate developers in art museum neighborhood and increased museum program funding by elite patrons, which
tend to make art museums agents of displacement in their adjacent neighborhood. 2) Low growth urban area,
and their relative lack of investment from real estate developers in art museum neighborhood and museum
funding by elite patrons, tend to force art museums to rely on national arts grants that emphasize engagement
with diverse community groups, thus helping them anchor the diverse residents of adjacent neighborhood.
Rather than ‘pigeon-holing’ art museums as agents of displacement and elite interests, or uncritically assuming
they serve ‘the public,’ my research describes how urban art museums can play a significant role in the unequal
delineation of urban space through economic displacement, as well as how their programming and outreach can
help make urban space less unequal, depending on metropolitan economic trajectory and funding resources
available to the museum. I argue that the inclusion of affordable housing in art museum neighborhood and more
museum grant funding that emphasizes engagement of diverse groups can help neighborhood and their art
museums cultivate more equal urban space.
References
 Birch, E., Griffin, C., Johnson, A., & Stover, J. (2013, March 17). Arts and Culture Institutions as Urban
Anchors: Livingston Case Studies in Urban Development. Retrieved from
http://www.penniur.upenn.edu/uploads/media/Arts-Culture-Anchors-August-2013.pdf






Castells, M. (2002). The Castells Reader on city and Social Theory. I. Susser (Ed.). Malden,
Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishers Inc.
Gurian, E. (2001). Function Follows Form: How Mixed-Used Spaces in Museums Build Community.
Curator: The Museum Journal, 44(1), 97–113.
Harvey, D. (2001). The art of rent: globalization and the commodification of culture. in Spaces of Capital.
(pp. 394-411) New York, NY: Routledge.
Logan, J., & Molotch, H., (2005). The City as a Growth Machine. in J. Lin & C. Mele (Eds.), The Urban
Sociology Reader (pp. 97-105). New York, NY: Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 285
MOVING ON OR UP? NEIGHBORHOOD TRANSITIONS IN CHICAGO’S PUBLIC HOUSING 2006-2014
Abstract System ID#: 735
Individual Paper
GREENLEE, Andrew [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] agreen4@illinois.edu
Initiated in 1999, the ten-year Chicago Housing Authority Plan for Transformation sought to fundamentally
change the relationship between low-income households and forms of Federal low-income housing support.
Fifteen years later, the plan is still being implemented. Many of the residents initially displaced by the
redevelopment continue to reside off-site, either by choice, due to limited subsidized replacement housing, or
due to the slow pace at which replacement units have been constructed.
Residential mobility has played an important role in grounding Federal low-income housing policy and
evaluations of its effectiveness. As part of the Plan for Transformation, over 4,000 households received relocation
vouchers to facilitate moving out of public housing units slated for redevelopment. Other households moved into
public housing units not slated for demolition. Still other households left assisted housing altogether. Recent
evaluations of Chicago Housing Authority relocatee household locations reveal that an overwhelming majority of
these households continue to live in high-poverty, racially segregated comminuty, although demographic
indicators provide evidence that these neighborhood are still substantially better off than the neighborhood
where relocatees originated (Popkin, et al. 2013). This work also shows that while within-household conditions
(labor market participation, child welfare, elder welfare) have improved across the board, that there is little
substantive difference in outcomes regardless of residential location or whether relocatees chose to move with
vouchers or remain in public housing units (Chaskin, et al. 2012).
The powerful insight derived from these evaluations are limited by two factors- coverage- a focus on those
households who remain in subsidized housing (as opposed to those who phase out or who drop out of the
program), and timeframe- the period of time for which the analysis is performed. Given the findings from past
evaluations of post-Plan for Transformation neighborhood, are public housing relocatees moving on or up?
To complement the existing research, this research uses a novel source of longitudinal household data to
examine the residential transitions of households who were displaced as a result of public housing
redevelopment in Chicago. Because this study does not rely upon administrative records on subsidized
households, broader patterns of mobility can be assessed, particularly for those households who left Federal
housing assistance. This research focuses on two qualities of the neighborhood transitions of displaced
households- the demographic characteristics and structure of the residential neighborhood which public housing
relocatees moved into, and the overall trajectory of these neighborhood characteristics over time. Taken
together, this research questions what mix of spatial and demographic factors predict households moving to
more (or less) favorable neighborhood. The findings of this research will prove valuable not only for measuring
the impact of public housing redevelopment policy, but also for assessing whether residential mobility can help
disadvantaged households access the social and economic opportunity present in other neighborhood.

References
 Chaskin, Robert J., Mark L. Joseph, Sara Voelker, and Amy Dworsky. 2012. “Public Housing
Transformation and Resident Relocation: Comparing Destinations and Household Characteristics in
Chicago.” Cityscape: A Journal of Policy Development and Research, 14(1), 183-214.
 Popkin, Susan J., Megan Gallagher, Chantal Hailey, Elizabeth Davies, Larry Buron, and Christopher Hayes.
2013. “CHA Residents and the Plan for Transformation.” The Urban Institute.

Abstract Index #: 286
JUMP-STARTING THE HOUSING MARKET IN LEGACY city: A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF DOWNTOWN AND
MIDTOWN DETROIT
Abstract System ID#: 752
Individual Paper
VIDAL, Avis [Wayne State University] a.vidal@wayne.edu
Despite the City’s recently concluded bankruptcy and continuing population loss, two districts of Detroit-Downtown and adjacent Midtown--are showing clear signs of new private investment in residential real estate.
Each continues to be the target of a variety of revitalization investments, primarily from the corporate and
philanthropic sectors. The investment strategies and related planning activities have some critical elements in
common, but also some notable differences. This paper summarizes the strategies used in each target area. It
then compares the performance of two virtually identical, and widely acclaimed program, Live Midtown and Live
Downtown, designed to provide a sustained stimulus to the demand for rental housing, and interprets the results
in light of the characteristics of their contexts.
Downtown Detroit has received widespread media attention as a result of significant investments by Dan Gilbert,
founder of Quicken Loans, who now owns or effectively controls about 60 buildings in the CBD. His development
firm is improving the properties and recruiting new tenants; his goal include creating a walkable, mixed use
district with substantially greater residential density that appeals to young professionals. Over the past four
years, Gilbert has moved the employees of all of his Southeast Michigan corporate offices to buildings he
purchased and persuaded other major employers, e.g. Chrysler, Blue Cross-Blue Shield, to relocate some of their
employees Downtown. Those early entrants to the CBD are the employers participating in Live Downtown.
Midtown, immediately north of Downtown, is the city’s second largest employment center. Its revitalization is
widely viewed as critical to Detroit’s future. Its anchor employers--Wayne State University (WSU), the Detroit
Medical Center (DMC), and Henry Ford Health System (HFHS)--have all committed to major investment program
in and around their facilities, and Midtown Detroit Inc, a very high-capacity nonprofit planning and development
organization, has long pursued the revitalization of the neighborhood. The Woodward Corridor Initiative (WCI),
launched in 2010 by these organizations and others with funding from Living city, allowed them to expand their
efforts; Live Midtown, targeted to employees of the three anchors, was launched in 2011.
Live Midtown and Live Downtown, started at about the same time, each provide the same attractive package of
financial incentives for employees to move to their employer’s target area. To date, they have been credited in
the media with bringing rental vacancy rates in both neighborhood down to 3 percent (this in neighborhood
reported in the 2010 census to have vacancy rates above 15 percent).
This paper will examine the strategy behind the Live Midtown and Live Downtown program design, and their
performance during their first four years of operation, with particular attention to where participants located and
the rents they pay. It will pair this with an examination of private developer activity in the neighborhood,
including the innovative financing and incentives employed in both places. The expected finding is that the
combination of demand and supply strategies is required to jump-start such a weak housing market, i.e. that the
highly visible demand stimulus would have been inadequate to produce the desired market response Since the
rough “formulas” for both the demand and the supply-side incentives are being used in not only in Detroit but
also in other “legacy” city districts, and clearly have broader replication potential, the design and performance of

these interventions, and the aspects of context that seem to make a difference in their impact, may shed light on
what results might be expected if the strategy were deployed in other shrinking city.
References
 Vidal, Avis C. "Anchor-Driven Development in a Very Weak Market: The Case of Midtown, Detroit" in
Kelly Patterson and Robert Silverman, eds. Schools and Urban Revitalization: Rethinking Institutions and
Community Development, 2013.
 CEOs for city. How to Behave Like an Anchor Institution. White Paper, June 2010.
 ICIC. Anchor Institutions and Economic Development. Inner City Insights, Vol 1, Issue 2, June 2011.
 Opportunity Detroit. A Plan for Our Time. Spring-Summer, 2013. http://opportunitydetroit.com/wpcontent/themes/OppDet_v2/assets/APlanforOurTime-Sm2.pdf
 Woodward Corridor Initiative Overview. (n.d.). Available from
http://woodwardcorridorinitiative.org/index.php/woodward-corridor-initiative

Abstract Index #: 287
CORPORATE-SPONSORED INFORMALITY: ONLINE HOMESHARING AND ITS EFFECTS ON HOUSING MARKETS
AND neighborhood
Abstract System ID#: 800
Individual Paper
WEGMANN, Jake [University of Texas at Austin] jagw@utexas.edu, presenting author, primary author
JIAO, Junfeng [University of Texas at Austin] jjiao@utexas.edu
Internet-based “homesharing” services simultaneously offer travelers a new option for accommodation and raise
important questions about their effects on housing markets. They also raise vexing regulatory questions, since
private dwellings rented for short-term stays frequently violate local laws such as zoning ordinances and
requirements to pay hotel taxes. As a consequence, the recent explosive growth of such services as Airbnb has
forced several US city to confront whether and how to regulate homesharing, even while operating with a
dearth of data on homesharing’s effects on housing markets and neighborhood.
Proponents of homesharing argue that it stabilizes housing markets by providing extra income to homeowners or
renters, allowing them to remain in their homes even in the face of escalating housing costs. Critics, by contrast,
note cases in which homesharing has facilitated the removal of entire housing units from the long-term housing
market and their extralegal conversion to de facto guesthouses or dormitories. Which of these two effects
outweighs the other? In addition, what is the geographic distribution of homesharing within a city? Can an
estimation methodology addressing these questions be crafted that could be replicated by city seeking data to
inform their efforts to regulate homesharing?
To date, these questions are relatively underexamined. One study, which portrayed the effects of homesharing as
comparatively benign in New York City, is suspect because it was commissioned by Airbnb (Rosen, Sakamoto, and
Bank, 2013). Another, more detailed, study by the New York State Attorney General’s office (2014) reached a
much more damning conclusion, although it was carried out by an entity pursuing legal action against Airbnb. We
believe that a careful academic study, carried out by researchers with no personal, professional, or financial stake
in the success or failure of any homesharing service, analyzing the effects of homesharing in large US city is
needed and timely.
Our study, already underway, uses “webscraping” and GIS software to systematically collect and map the Airbnb
listings in two city: San Francisco and Austin. Both are examples of city that are associated with the technology
industry, are prominent tourist destinations, and that are experiencing burgeoning housing demand fueled by
rapid economic growth. Not surprisingly, homesharing and its effects on housing markets and neighborhood
have been controversial in both. At the same time, they provide an interesting contrast: San Francisco has a
robust rent stabilization ordinance, thus increasing the opportunities for profiteering via Airbnb, while Austin
lacks one entirely.

Urban theorists such as AlSayyad (2004) remind us that informality is not only the province of immigrants or the
working class seeking to eke out a living amidst hardship. With the rise of homesharing, businesses such as
Airbnb whose profitability depends on the flouting of laws that regulate housing and hospitality portend the rise
of a new type of corporate-style business operating in the informal economy. The question that city face is
whether to bend their existing regulatory frameworks in the face of such disruption, or seek to suppress it. Our
hope is that our study will be helpful to both academics and practitioners seeking to grapple with such questions.
References
 AlSayyad, Nezar. 2004. "A 'New' Way of Life." In Ananya Roy and Nezar AlSayyad (Eds.), Urban
Informality: Transnational Perspectives from the Middle East, Latin America, and South Asia. Lexington
Books.
 New York State Office of the Attorney General. 2014 (October). “Airbnb in the City.” Research
Department and Internet Bureau. New York State Office of the Attorney General. 2014 (October).
“Airbnb in the City.” Research Department and Internet Bureau. URL: http://www.ag.ny.gov/pdfs/Airbnb
report.pdf
 Rosen, Kenneth T., Randall Sakamoto, and David Bank. 2013 (October). “Short-Term Rentals and the
Impact on the Apartment Market.” Rosen Consulting Group. URL: http://publicpolicy.airbnb.com/wpcontent/uploads/2014/04/Short-TermRentalsandImpactonApartmentMarketNY1.pdf

Abstract Index #: 288
URBAN FORM AND SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY IMPACT ASSESSMENT IN MICROSCALE BY USING AHP AND MCA:
EVIDENCE FROM ONE HUNDRED neighborhood IN TEXAS
Abstract System ID#: 811
Poster
SAJJADIEH KHAJOUEI, Ayeh [University of Texas at Arlington] ayeh.khajouei@mavs.uta.edu
Since sustainable concept development was born, the different dimensions of sustainability have not been
equally focused on, and the emphasis has only been on the concept of environment sustainability. As a result,
the most notable argument regarding the relationship between sustainability  impact and urban form revolves
around the environment aspect of sustainability that encourages high density and mixed-use development to
decrease urban sprawl and protect agricultural lands. However, other studies have discussed that this
perspective seems to not fully address how humans interact in complex ways with social involvements. They
argued that if people have the choice, they would choose low-density suburban living rather than compact city
living.
This research will review debates about social sustainability and highlight some relationships to understand in
what way does urban form contribute to social sustainability. An extensive literature review was conducted in
order to explore the concept of social sustainability and critically examine the main impact assessment methods
and metrics established to measure its nature. Next, it review debates about urban form and social sustainability
and point out some expecting relationship to assess in what ways does urban form contributes it.
The empirical part of the paper will present some new evidence based on one hundred chosen neighborhood in
the five biggest city in Texas (Dallas, Fort Worth, San Antonio, Houston, and Austin). Twenty registered
neighborhoods association with their respective city from inner, middle, and outer area of each of these city
were selected. 2010 census data and the database of neighborhood associations were used to collect data and
measure social sustainability dimensions. The multiple centrality assessment (MCA), and the analytic hierarchy
process (AHP) as a multi-criteria decision-making (MCDM) method were used to aggregate the  impact of the
proposed criteria into a social sustainability index and define the relationship between these dimensions.
Based on literature and dataset, this research proposed social sustainability in microscale as comprising two main
dimensions and nine suggested criteria: (a) “equity” (access to local services, public transportation, affordable

housing, and employment), and (b) “community and society” (participation and interaction in the community,
cultural and community diversity, pride and sense of place, stability, and safety). The result derived from
regression modeling indicated how far social sustainability could be explained by systematic relationships with
different dimensions of urban form (distribution of job densities, density of residential development, local road
networks layout, dominant type of residential (single family or multi-family), use of land (separation or
intermixed with residential and activities), and housing layout) in neighborhood-scale. The results revealed that
there exists a significant relationship between social sustainability and different variables of urban form.
References
 Dempsey, N., Bramley, G., Power, S., & Brown, C. (2011). The social dimension of sustainable
development: Defining urban social sustainability. Sustainable Development, 19(5), 289-300
 Colantonio, A. (2007). Social sustainability: An exploratory analysis of its definition, assessment methods
metrics and tools.
 McKenzie, S. (2004). Social sustainability: towards some definitions. Magill: Hawke Research Institute,
University of South Australia.
 Landorf, C. (2011). Evaluating social sustainability in historic urban environments. International Journal
of Heritage Studies, 17(5), 463-477.
 Meadows, D. H., Meadows, D. L., Randers, J., & Behrens, W. W. (1972). The limits to growth. New York,
102

Abstract Index #: 289
THE MYTH OF SELF-SUFFICIENCY
Abstract System ID#: 812
Individual Paper
ROHE, William [Univ. of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] brohe@unc.edu, presenting author, primary author
FRESCOLN, Kirstin [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] kirstinf@live.unc.edu
The Myth of Self-Sufficiency
Historically, the objectives of U.S. housing policy was to provide “a decent home and in a suitable living
environment for every American family. The focus was on creating and managing housing that met minimum
quality standards, and on making that housing available to modest-income families. Starting in the 1980s,
however, the objectives of housing program began to be broadened to include the promotion of “selfsufficiency” among the residents of public housing. Beyond providing decent and affordable units, the 3,300 U.S.
local housing authorities responsible for building, managing and administering public housing program were
now expected to assist their clients develop job skills, find and keep employment, increase their incomes, and
ultimately become “self sufficient” ( Kleit and Rohe 2005, Newman and Harkness 2002, Rohe & Kleit 1999, Silva et
al. 2011). Beyond HUD’s Family Self Sufficiency program, many other HUD program have resident self
sufficiency as a key program goal including the Moving to Work, Jobs Plus and the Choice Neighborhood
programs.
The terms “self sufficiency” have slipped into the titles and objective statements of contemporary housing
programs without a clear understanding of what they really mean, their implications for explaining poverty, the
barriers to becoming self sufficient, and whether achieving self sufficiency it is a reasonable expectation for many
public-housing residents.
The purpose of this article is to provide a critical analysis of the concept of self sufficiency as it has been used in
U.S. housing policy. More specifically, the paper will address the following questions:
1. What are the cultural origins of the concept of self-sufficiency?
2. What has led to its inclusion in U.S. housing policy?
3. How has self-sufficiency been defined in federal housing and social policy? [A review of policy and program
will be provided here.]

4. What are the key arguments for and against including self-sufficiency as a key objective of affordable housing
programs?
5. What are reasonable expectations for self-sufficiency among very-low-income households given the many
obstacles they face?
6. What do we know about the effectiveness of self-sufficiency program?
7. How should the effectiveness of self-sufficiency program be assessed?
8. Should we continue to use the term self-sufficiency or are there more appropriate terms?
The methods to be employed in developing this paper are literature review and analysis.
References
 Kleit, R. and W. Rohe (2005) “Predicting Success in Self-sufficiency program," Housing Studies 20 (1):
81-105.
 Newman, S. and J. Harkess. 2002. “The long-Term Effects of Public Housing on Self Sufficiency.” Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management, 21 (1): 21-43.
 Rohe, W. and R. Kleit (1999) “Housing, Welfare Reform and Self-Sufficiency: An Assessment of the Family
Self-Sufficiency Program,” Housing Policy Debate 10:2, pp. 333-369.
 Silva, L, I. Wijewarden, M. Woos and B. Kaul. 2011. Evaluation of the Family Self-Sufficiencey Program:
Prospective Study. Washington D.C.: Office of Policy Development and Research, U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development.

Abstract Index #: 290
DETERMINANTS OF METRO- AND COUNTY-LEVEL VARIATIONS IN EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY
Abstract System ID#: 830
Individual Paper
PAULSEN, Kurt [University of Wisconsin] kpaulsen@wisc.edu
Chetty et al (2014) recently produced metro-level and county-level measures of intergenerational economic
mobility in the U.S. from millions of income tax records. Their research shows clear geographical differences in
the equality of opportunity across the United States. Significantly for urban_planning, they find that area with
greater racial and economic segregation experienced less upward mobility and that more “sprawling” area (as
proxied by longer commute times) also experienced less intergenerational mobility. Their results indicate that
place – and planning – matter significantly in shaping the equality of opportunity.
In this study, I build on Chetty et al (2014) and utilize their estimates of metro-level and county-level relative and
absolute intergenerational mobility. I supplement these measures with other metro- and county-level measures
of equality of opportunity, primarily black-white earnings and poverty differentials. Through maps and
descriptive statistics, I show the geographical variation in equality of opportunity across area.
I then present a regression analysis of the determinants of cross-county and cross-metro variations in mobility
measures. Building on work on housing supply elasticity (Paulsen 2012) and on measures of sprawl (Paulsen
2014), I estimate the impact of  land_use and housing supply policy on the spatial patterns of intergenerational
inequality. Specifically, I test the following hypotheses: 1) how does the relative availability of rental housing
supply outside of central city (suburbs) explain interregional variation in mobility? 2) what is the relationship
between “sprawl” (measured as marginal land consumption per net new household), land development
restrictions and equality of opportunity? 3) how do housing prices/rents explain geographic differences in
opportunity.
References
 Chetty, R., et al. (2014). "Where is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational
Mobility in the United States." Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(4): 1553-1623.






Easton, T. (2012). "Optimal Housing Cost Estimates for 177 U.S. Metropolitan area." Journal of Regional
Science 52(3): 469-485.
Paulsen, K. (2012). The Evolution of Suburban Relative Housing-Unit Diversity. Housing Policy Debate
22(3): 407-433.
Paulsen, K. (2014). Geography, Policy, or Market? New Evidence on the Measurement and Causes of
Sprawl (and Infill) in U.S. Metropolitan Regions. Urban Studies. 51(12), 2629-2645.
Saiz, A. (2010). "The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply." The Quarterly Journal of Economics
125(3): 1253-1296.

Abstract Index #: 291
CRISIS MANAGEMENT: CALIFORNIA NONPROFIT HOUSING DEVELOPERS AND THE GREAT RECESSION
Abstract System ID#: 841
Individual Paper
WONG, Karna [University of California, Los Angeles] kwongucla@ucla.edu
During the Great Recession, nonprofits’ demand for services has increased while they are experiencing
unprecedented financial strain (Anheier 2007; Golden, Longhofer et al. 2009; Johnson 2011). This research
focuses on nonprofit housing development organizations (NHDOs) in California during 2000-2010. NHDOs
typically develop and/or manage housing and provide social services for low income persons.
In the past 20 years, many NHDOs have struggled with adequate capital and operating reserves to preserve their
affordable housing stock (Bratt, Vidal et al. 1998). For NHDOs, these financial issues are exacerbated by the
housing and economic crises and the recent elimination of California state Redevelopment Agency funds. There
have been a few studies on the effects of the economic crisis on the nonprofit sector but no systemic analysis on
outcomes for NHDOs.
This paper addresses the research question: how have nonprofit housing development organizations been
affected by the Great Recession that began in 2007? It studies the effects of the housing and economic crises on
NHDOs in California regarding survival and revenue, during the period of 2000-2010. This mixed-methods
research analyzed a cohort of about 800 California NHDOs in 2000 and determined if they survived in 2010 and
what factors effected their performance. The quantitative research included a multivariate analysis of variables
that influence the sustainability of nonprofit housing development organizations. For the qualitative research,
interviews of executive directors and managers of nonprofit housing developers and housing associations
assessed how and why these organizations experienced variations in survival and revenue.
With funding decreasing on all levels of government (federal, state, and local), NHDOs had to strategically
manage their housing development pipeline, real estate portfolios, and staffing levels. From this research, the
four main factors were associated with NHDOs’ survival and performance: (1) regional differences and
agglomeration effects, (2) diversifying revenue sources, (3) implementing adaptive management, and (4)
establishing joint ventures and mergers. The lessons learned and management tactics from these NHDOs inform
other organizations how to survive and thrive during tough economic times.
References
 Anheier, H. K. (2007). "Reflections on the concept and measurement of global civil society." Voluntas:
International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations 18(1): 1-15.
 Bratt, R. G., A. C. Vidal, et al. (1998). "The status of nonprofit-owned affordable housing - Short-term
successes and long-term challenges." Journal of the American Planning Association 64(1): 39-51.
 Golden, S., W. Longhofer, et al. (2009). "Nonprofits in need." Contexts 8(3): 14-15.
 Johnson, D. L. (2011). "Untwisting Lifeline Nonprofits in the Economic Crisis." 18 Georgetown Journal of
Poverty Law & Policy 201-245.

Abstract Index #: 292
THE  impact OF COMMUNITY LAND TRUSTS ON GENTRIFICATION
Abstract System ID#: 842
Individual Paper
CHOI, Myungshik [Texas A&M University] cms6308@gmail.com
Gentrification is a shift in an urban community toward wealthier residents or businesses and increasing property
values, at the expense of displacement of the poorer residents of the community. This is one of the most widely
used concepts in urban_planning and development, and has been practically evident in many city around the
world for the past several decades. However, poorer residents who are unable to pay increased rents in a
gentrified community may be driven out. A more serious problem than displacement is the removal of affordable
housing from the community’s building stock.
In this sense, the Community Land Trust (CLT) can be a good way to address negative effects of gentrification.
CLTs arose from the concept that land is not a private good but a public asset. The fundamental principle of CLTs
is that a community owns and leases lands through a long-term ground lease to individual residents who own
their homes located on the land. CLTs are used in the U.S. mainly to provide long-term owner-occupied housing
for low income households, and are rapidly disseminated in the U.S. This research aims to assess the  impact of
CLTs on gentrification to practically answer the question; “Do CLTs really counteract the negative effects on
community caused by gentrification?”
To assess the  impact of CLTs, the information of each CLT units’ locations and the year of introduction was
requested to 131 CLT organizations, and responded from 68 organizations (response rate is 52%) with 3,709
units’ information. A mixed method research, which uses both quantitative and qualitative methods, is a
fundamental structure to get a more holistic view about the research question. The relationship between CLTs
and gentrification is examined through a cross-sectional comparison and a logistic regression in the quantitative
approach; how the findings of the quantitative approach are fit for the practical situation is reviewed by the
qualitative approach. Findings show that CLTs have a negative relationship with gentrification and suggest that
CLTs can address the problems caused by gentrification.
This study can show how CLTs have positive  impact on neighborhood in practice from the public’s perspective.
Therefore, the results of this study offer policy guidelines to the city governments having a plan to introduce CLTs
in their jurisdiction, and help community leaders and/or residents know how to improve and stabilize their
neighborhoods. While comprehensive CLT information are investigated in this study, it is expected that more
case studies about practical CLT cases in the U.S. will be followed, and finally, this study can be one of the
significant cornerstones for evaluating the CLT model itself.
References
 Davis, J. E. (Ed.). (2010). The Community Land Trust Reader. Cambridge, MA: Lincoln Institute of Land
Policy.
 Lees, L., Slater, T., and Wyly, E. (2008). Gentrification. New York, NY: Routledge.
 Defilippis, J. (2004). Unmaking Goliath: Community control in the face of global capital. Routledge
 Curtin, J. F., & Bocarsly, L. (2008). CLTs: A Growing Trend in Affordable Home Ownership. Journal of
Affordable Housing & Community Development Law, 367-394.
 Ehlenz, M. M. (2014), Community Land Trusts And Limited Equity Cooperatives: A Marriage Of
Affordable Homeownership Models?, Lincoln Institute of Land Policy Working Paper

Abstract Index #: 293
THE FUTURE OF HOUSING RESEARCH
Abstract System ID#: 852
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session

SANCHEZ, Thomas [Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State University] tom.sanchez@vt.edu
This roundtable discussion will be sponsored by Housing Policy Debate and will invite four housing policy
researchers to discuss future trends in housing research. This coincides with an issue of Housing Policy Debate
that includes essays on trends in housing research written by 10 editorial advisory board members. The set of
essays will be the topic for discussion as well as additional comment from the panel and audience.

Abstract Index #: 294
CONTEXTUALIZING URBAN ‘JUST’ REDEVELOPMENT: THE ROLE OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND SOCIAL CAPITAL IN
RESETTLEMENT
Abstract System ID#: 871
Individual Paper
KIM, Hyun [University of Wisconsin-Madison] hkim525@wisc.edu, presenting author, primary author
YOON, Dong Keun [Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology] dkyoon@unist.ac.kr
A better city has a more equitable and redistributive system: it is a ‘just city’ where “public investment and
regulation would produce equitable outcomes rather than support those already well off (Fainstein, 2010, p.3).”
By listing specific policy criteria that would further equity, diversity, and democracy, Fainstein (2010) and
Marcuse (2009) stress out powerless marginalized groups should be able to participate in decision-making
process and its outcome should be distributed equitably. For better city, redevelopment of deteriorated
residential settings can create new economic opportunity for revalorization of underdeveloped urban space. That
said determinants of urban renewal success are complex. Neighborhood renewal and relocation of current
inhabitants often go hand-in-hand. The relocation of original residents from redeveloped area often creates the
effect of lowering social cohesion and social ties within neighborhood. Also, redevelopment often fails to
provide improvement in existing social, economic, and environment status of those relocated individuals;
ultimately leading to redeveloped space surrounded by societal breakdown reflective of physical and social
decay.
Following Fainstein’s (2010) social justice practice and Soja’s (2010) spatial justice discourse in urban_planning
context and learning from recent housing and residential redevelopment projects within a metropolitan area in
Korean, we investigate the relationship between original residents’ intention to resettle and various social justice
attributes (including equity, diversity, and democracy), social capital, socio-economic characteristics, and
community amenities. Based upon a review of the extant literature, three theoretical hypotheses are proposed.
First, social justice (e.g., residents’ participation in social issues, voting turnout, number of non-government
organizations), social capital (e.g., longtime residence, satisfactory ties with neighbors), and a higher preference
for civic participation (i.e., a higher degree of participation by original residents) components are positively
correlated with the original habitants’ preference for resettlement in the redevelopment project. Second,
household and individual level status, such as a big family, high household income, age, and owning their house,
is positively correlated with the original residents’ intention to resettle; and third, better accessibility for
neighborhood or local amenities is correlated with higher original dwellers’ intention to resettle.
This study employs multi-level and spatial data analysis (spatial clustering, geographically weighted regression)
incorporating survey based data collected from former residents in 137 designated residential redevelopment
areas from April to June of 2011, matched with secondary data from the Korean Statistical Information Service.
Among various factors derived from the previous studies, housing price variation, neighborhood bonds, and the
period for the project completion were selected as resettlement determinants. More importantly, due to a higher
likelihood of a housing value increase after redevelopment, the residents were more likely to be willing to
resettle. Regarding social networking and community involvement in residential resettlement, the better a
residents’ social networking conditions, such as relationships with neighbors and participation in the
redevelopment projects, the higher the probability of resettlement. These empirical findings can be useful in
addressing the positive role of social justice and social capital in determining resettlement of original dwellers’
intention.

References
 Davidson, M. (2008). Spoiled mixture: Where does state-led ‘positive’ gentrification end? Urban Studies,
45(12), 2385-2405.
 Fainstein, S.S. (2010). The Just City. Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press.
 Marcuse, P. (2009). From justice planning to commons planning. (In P. Marcuse, J. Connolly, J. Novy, I.
Olivo, C. Potter, & J. Steil (Eds.), Searching for the Just City: Debates in Urban Theory and Practice (pp.
91-102). London and New York: Routledge.
 Kleinhans, R. (2004). Social implications of housing diversification in urban renewal: A review of recent
literature. Journal of Housing and the Built Environment, 19, 367-390.
 Soja, E.W. (2010). Seeking Spatial Justice. Minneapolis and London: University of Minnesota Press.

Abstract Index #: 295
RACE AND UNEVEN RECOVERY: NEIGHBORHOOD HOME VALUE TRAJECTORIES IN ATLANTA BEFORE AND AFTER
THE HOUSING CRISIS
Abstract System ID#: 1380
Individual Paper
RAYMOND, Elora [Georgia Institute of Technology] elora.raymond@gatech.edu, presenting author
IMMERGLUCK, Dan [Georgia Tech] dan.immergluck@coa.gatech.edu, primary author
WANG, Kyungsoon [Georgia Institute of Technology] kwang42@gatech.edu
During the U.S. housing boom and bust, U.S. home prices rose to unprecedented heights, lifted by poorly
underwritten mortgages. When the U.S. housing crisis began in late 2006 and 2007, home values crashed and
foreclosures and vacancies skyrocketed. In 2011, a modest recovery began. However, this national story obscures
a great deal of variation underlying the averages. The bubble and housing deflation hit some regions, states, and
cities hard, while others were left almost unscathed. In particular, there have been substantial differences in the
degree to which different neighborhood have rebounded from the crisis. How can we characterize the
neighborhood-level unevenness of this crisis, and why have some neighborhood recovered more than others
have?
Some research has investigated metropolitan-level variations in outcomes during the bubble and foreclosure
crisis, focusing on institutional factors leading to the density of subprime lending (Williams, McConnell, & Nesiba,
2001), variation in state foreclosure law (Immergluck, 2010; Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi, 2011), or patterns in new
home construction (Saiz, 2010) as a key factors differentiating home price bubbles and recovery from others.
However, there has been little work to date on intrametropolitan – or neighborhood-level - variations in home
prices up through the recovery period. There is no clear evidence which types of neighborhood have fared
better than others within a metropolitan area.
In this analysis of intrametropolitan variation in housing values, we use zip-code-level home value data and
cluster analysis to define three different types of neighborhood housing markets in the Atlanta metropolitan area
based on their levels of volatility and stability before, during, and after the crisis. We identify the demographic
and housing market characteristics of each of these three clusters and use multivariate analysis to measure their
predictive association with the three neighborhood types. We also examine the factors that predict long-term
price appreciation over the 2001 to 2014 period.
This paper aims at understanding the factors that predicted whether a neighborhood experienced extreme
volatility in housing prices during the boom and bust and the extent to which housing price recovery occurs. It
develops a method of categorizing and understanding types of uneven housing market recovery, and identifies
fundamental demographic and housing market characteristics associated with different housing market
trajectories within a region hit hard by the subprime and foreclosure crises.

Consistently strong relationships that suggest that many black neighborhood – even those with lower degrees of
poverty – exhibited steep rates of price decline with only modest or essentially no recovery following the crisis.
Meanwhile, many predominantly white, middle- and upper-income neighborhood experienced less volatility
during the boom and bust, and have generally more than recovered from the modest housing price declines that
they did face. The reasons behind these patterns are complex and not directly addressed here. However, it is
important to understand that such variations occurred and that they were associated with racial differences.
References
 Immergluck, D. (2010) neighborhood in the wake of the debacle: Intrametropolitan patterns of
foreclosed properties, Urban Affairs Review, 46, pp.3-36.
 Mian, A., Sufi, A., & Trebbi, F. (2011) Foreclosures, house prices, and the real economy. No. w16685.
National Bureau of Economic Research.
 Williams, R., Nesiba, R., and McConnell, E. (2005) The changing face of inequality in home mortgage
lending, Social Problems, 52, pp.181-208.
 Saiz, A. (2010) The geographic determinants of housing supply, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125,
pp.1253-1296.

Abstract Index #: 296
HOUSING ACCESS AND GOVERNANCE: THE EFFECTS AND EVOLUTION OF HOUSING ORGANIZATIONS IN MEXICO
CITY
Abstract System ID#: 888
Individual Paper
REYES RUIZ DEL CUETO, Laura Alejandra [University of Texas at Austin] larrc2324@gmail.com
In The City and the Grassroots, Manuel Castells argues that throughout history and in different parts of the world,
urban social movements have been able to have a major impact on public policy and spatial structures. I argue
that housing movements and organizations in Mexico City have evolved to have such an effect. Yet, even when
dire conditions may at times urge people to coalesce and mobilize around shared concerns, macroeconomic and
sociopolitical forces also continuously challenge and weaken the social and political platforms which civil society
requires to monitor and scrutinize the various processes that drive the growth and development of their
communities, city and regions. This paper studies the evolution of urban social movements and housing
organizations in Mexico City, and their role in the production of low-income housing. I argue that mobilizations
around detrimental housing conditions provided more than support to low-income tenants and affordable
housing production. They also pushed for the democratization of the local government. This in turn aided, with
the election of a sympathetic government, in the consolidation and institutionalization of housing program.
Currently, however, housing unaffordability continues to be a significant issue, and the powerful grassroots
organizing that developed before the turn of the century seems to be dwindling.
Rapid urbanization during the 20th century in Mexico City made housing conditions increasingly harsh for lowincome residents. Besides the physical deterioration of low-income housing and inner-city neighborhood, a lack
of oversight and regulation produced unfair landlord-tenant relations, accelerated rent increases, and an
escalation in the number of evictions. Furthermore, urban renewal projects led to the demolition of thousands of
low-income housing units. As a consequence, tenants and low-income residents began to mobilize to oppose
inadequate housing conditions and urban renewal projects. Civic opposition to the economic and political forces
that enabled such conditions culminated in the formation of the Asamblea de Barrios (Neighborhoods’ Assembly)
in 1987. Its main objectives were to promote rental housing regulations and low-income housing construction.
The second task in particular, forced the neighborhood’ Assembly to move beyond mobilizing and involve itself
in the financing and actual physical production and rehabilitation of housing.
Nonetheless, the Assembly did not renounce its organizing tactics and remained an important source of
sociopolitical mobilization, especially to remove the then established political regime from power. They were first
successful, along with other civic groups, in pushing for increased political and administrative autonomy at the

local level through the formation of a Legislative Assembly and the establishment of mayoral elections in the
1990s. This in turn gave housing issues and demands more prominence and allowed the creation and
establishment of new norms and institutional frameworks. Thus, and despite limited resources, new local housing
strategies set notable standards, particularly within a context of meager and declining federal housing resources,
and an increasingly ephemeral national housing policy quickly supplanted by developers and the real-estate
market as the main arbiters of housing production and development. Housing organizations were evidently very
influential in the drafting and implementation of housing program that have meant to increase housing access in
the city. More recently, however, collective processes of housing production at the local level have also been
increasingly replaced by the private sector, leading to a loss of affordability and community involvement.
Furthermore, housing organizations and leaders have become increasingly susceptible to political whims and
electoral cycles, giving place to clientelistic and corrupt practices. As civic groups have ceased to play the
important role of monitoring government actions, housing policy and efforts have lost legitimacy among the
citizenry.
References
 Elizabeth J. Mueller, Ph.D., Associate Professor
 Peter M. Ward, Ph.D., Associate Dean for Research
 Bjorn I. Sletto, Ph.D., Associate Professor
 Sarah E. Dooling, Ph.D., Assistant Professor

Abstract Index #: 297
LOCATION EFFICIENCY OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNDER THE LOW-INCOME HOUSING TAX CREDIT PROGRAM
Abstract System ID#: 895
Individual Paper
PIVO, Gary [University of Arizona] gpivo@email.arizona.edu
SANDERFORD, Andrew [University of Arizona] sanderford@email.arizona.edu
A growing recognition that the cost of transportation should be included in calculations of housing affordability
(Dawkins, 2013) has led to government and non-profit initiatives to promote location efficiency in affordable
housing policy (Talen & Koschinsky, 2014). As the program responsible for most new affordable housing in the
United States (Lang, 2012), the Low-income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) program is a critical link between housing
affordability and location efficiency. However, the effects of market forces, public policy, and sustainability
related location attributes on the development of new affordable housing units have yet to be empirically
concurrently modeled.
Using data from the EPA’s Smart Location Database, the paper evaluates location efficiency for all of the more
than 37,000 LIHTC properties placed in service since 1987. Drawing on the LIHTC property database, each
property record has been matched with the location efficiency data for its corresponding block group. Metrics of
relative and absolute location efficiency were then calculated and compared at the State level. Then, several
logistic regression models were generated to test which location efficiency characteristics explain the presence of
LIHTC properties in block groups—independent of conventional metrics such as vacancy rates.
Preliminary findings suggest that nationally—while there is room for improvement—LIHTC properties tend to be
concentrated in more location efficient block groups. Key contributions of this paper for both practice and
research will be 1) determining the extent to which LIHTC has provided housing in location efficient places; 2)
identifying policy at the state level that have contributed to more LIHTC location decisions; and 3) determining
whether LIHTC housing developers are using location efficiency as a significant location criterion in addition to
other location drivers.

References
 Dawkins, C. (2013) The Spatial Pattern of Low Income Housing Tax Credit Properties: Implications for Fair
Housing and Poverty Deconcentration policy, Journal of the American Planning Association, 79:3, 222234, DOI:10.1080/01944363.2014.895635
 Talen, E., & Koschinsky, J. (2014) The Neighborhood Quality of Subsidized Housing, Journal of the
American Planning Association, 80:1, 67-82, DOI: 10.1080/01944363.2014.935232
 Lang, B. (2012) Location incentives in the low-income housing tax credit: Are qualified census tracts
necessary? Journal of Housing Economics, 21, 142-150. 10.1016/j.jhe.2012.04.002

Abstract Index #: 298
PUTTING DISABILITY DISPARITIES ON THE MAP
Abstract System ID#: 900
Pre-organized Session: ADA PARC
NOLAN, Lauren [University of Illinois at Chicago] laurenn@uic.edu, presenting author, primary author
LEE, Danbi [University of Illinois at Chicago] dlee72@uic.edu
The use of data-driven “community indicators” and “benchmarking” has grown in the planning field. However, it
has not yet been fully deployed to understand the needs and experiences of persons with disabilities, particularly
in ways that are meaningful to practitioners and the larger disability community. Significant community and
economic participation disparities exist between persons with disabilities and the larger population. Spatial and
community- or neighborhood-level conditions play a central role in these trends. Practitioners seeking to plan for
and address disability-related livability and participation challenges stand to benefit from better use of data tools
and spatial analysis. This paper focuses on the ways in which data and mapping can be used to document,
understand, and address community and economic participation disparities for persons with disabilities. We
draw from our data and knowledge transfer work undertaken with the Americans with Disabilities Act
Participation Action Research Consortium (ADA-PARC). Our goal is threefold: 1) to identify key data indicators
useful in measuring livability, community and economic participation, and corresponding disparities; 2) to
describe creative strategies as well as challenges to using these data and mapping them spatially; and 3) to
present questions or problems that planning educators, researchers, and practitioners might use this data to
address. This paper will outline the theory and practice of developing community indicators and their different
uses, with a review of other such efforts that have been used to understand the needs of people with disabilities.
Next the different data used will be reviewed to discuss limitations but also specific issues of interpretation as it
pertains to the target population. We will conclude with examples of the data as it has been and can be put to
use in addressing planning questions.

Abstract Index #: 299
EVALUATING SCHOOL CLOSURE DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES
Abstract System ID#: 914
Pre-organized Session: Considering Schools in Community Development
SEASONS, Mark [University of Waterloo] mseasons@uwaterloo.ca
Many comminuty across Canada and the United States must contend with permanent school closures. The
manner in which school boards interact with community residents is considered problematic and a major
contributor to dissatisfaction with accommodation review processes. This paper explores whether, to what
extent, and how meaningfully school boards consult with community residents when considering the permanent
closure of a school. Planning theory and public participation theory serve as points of reference for this
evaluation.
Schools play many roles in a community. They are places of education, of course; they are also an important part
of a community’s fabric and sense of identity. Consequently, the permanent closure of a school is one of the most

unsettling and de-stabilizing experiences for any community. From a policy perspective, school closure is a major
concern for local governments whose urban_planning objectives for comminuty (e.g. intensified forms of urban
development, downtown revitalization) are undermined when schools close.
These are rarely easy or positive situations that are made more difficult because of the manner in which closure
decisions are made. The accommodation review process often makes a very difficult situation worse. The
accommodation review process that culminates in a closure is, typically, divisive, emotionally charged and
conflict-ridden. Community residents feel overlooked and powerless; school board trustees and administrators
feel under siege. Distrust, anxiety and anger are common emotions.
Shortcomings in the decision-making process seem to underlie controversial school closure decisions, particularly
the manner in which stakeholders are consulted in these accommodation reviews. There have been many calls
for change to decision-making processes that have been characterized as exclusionary, insensitive to community
needs, and autocratic in nature. Surprisingly, there has been little formal evaluation of the accommodation
review decision-making process experience. Indeed, the international literature on this and related subjects (e.g.
school closures), while growing, is modest. The extant literature suggests that school board accommodation
review processes are at odds with community expectations of accountability, inclusiveness, fairness and
transparency in public sector agencies. Critics note that school board accommodation review committee
processes are presented as consultative, but they are not fully participatory and they are rarely collaborative in
nature or partnership based.
This paper reports on preliminary findings from a multi-year research program that studies accommodation
review process design and practices in Ontario, Canada. The paper identifies and categorizes current school
board practices, and considers whether planning theory and public participation theory could improve
accommodation review process design and management.
References
 Fredua-Kwarteng, E. (2005). School closures in Ontario: who has the final say? Canadian Journal of
Educational Administration and Policy, 46, 1-26
 Irwin, B. & Seasons, M. (2013). School closure decision-making processes: problems and prospects.
Canadian Journal of Urban Research, 21(2), 45-67
 Stout, M. (2010). Climbing the ladder of participation: Establishing local policy for participatory
practice. Public Administration and Management, 5(1), 45-98
 Vincent, J. (2006). Public schools as public infrastructure: Roles for planning researchers. Journal of
Planning Education and Research, 25, 433-437
 Witten, K., McCreanor, T., Kearns, R. & Ramasubramanian, L. (2001). The  impact of a school closure on
neighbourhood cohesion: narratives from Invercargill, New Zealand. Health & Place, 7, 307-317

Abstract Index #: 300
ASSESSING FORECLOSURE RECOVERY AT THE NEIGHBORHOOD LEVEL: A SPATIAL ANALYSIS OF REO HOME
PURCHASES
Abstract System ID#: 925
Individual Paper
MCMILLAN, Andrew [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] ajmcmil2@illinois.edu, presenting author,
primary author
CHAKRABORTY, Arnab [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] arnab@illinois.edu
Foreclosed properties owned by the lending institutions (real-estate owned or REO properties) are among the
most prevalent lingering effects of the foreclosure crisis. These so called “zombie properties” often remain vacant
for long times and contribute to neighborhood decline by reducing surrounding property values and by attracting
vandalism and blight (Immergluck 2014). These properties are also often located in low-income comminuty
further depressing their state. Other studies have indicated that the purchase of REO properties by consumer

households can expand access to homeownership and lead to a more robust neighborhood recovery (Pfeiffer and
Molina 2013). Little is known, however, about the key drivers of REO sales to consumer households.
This study addresses this gap by exploring the links between property, property location and neighborhood
characteristics and REO sale activity. Using a dataset of property transactions, this study determines the
characteristics of REO properties that become occupied by households and REO properties that remain vacant. A
spatial logit model is employed that differentiates between bank- or investor-purchased homes and homeownerpurchased REO homes. Explanatory variables include the time spent on the market and the block group-level
neighborhood characteristics, such as the recent foreclosure rate, as well as the housing cost and transportation
cost variables as determined by the Location Affordability Index. Pfeiffer and Molina (2013) found that
households in Los Angeles purchased REO homes in neighborhood with a relatively high potential for economic
mobility. As such, it is expected that block groups that are affordable and have relatively low foreclosure rates
will be popular for individual households purchasing REO properties. The results will point towards the relative
affordability of neighborhood that experience REO purchases by individuals and not institutions, and will
indicate opportunities for expanding access to homeownership in neighborhood with more affordable homes.
References
 Frame, W. S. (2010). Estimating the effect of mortgage foreclosures on nearby property values: A critical
review of the literature. Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, 95. Retrieved from
http://www.econstor.eu/handle/10419/57661
 Gangel, M., Seiler, M. J., & Collins, A. (2013). Exploring the foreclosure contagion effect using agentbased modeling. The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 46(2), 339–354.
 Immergluck, D., & Law, J. (2014). Investing in Crisis: The Methods, Strategies, and Expectations of
Investors in Single-Family Foreclosed Homes in Distressed neighborhood. Housing Policy Debate, 1–26.
doi:10.1080/10511482.2013.850733
 Pfeiffer, D., & Molina, E. T. (2013). The Trajectory of REOs in Southern California Latino neighborhood:
An Uneven Geography of Recovery. Housing Policy Debate, 23(1), 81–109.
doi:10.1080/10511482.2012.731655

Abstract Index #: 301
COMMUNITY BENEFITS FROM DEVELOPMENT: DELIVERING FOR HOUSEHOLDS IN POVERTY
Abstract System ID#: 926
Individual Paper
WHILE, Aidan [University of Sheffield] a.h.while@sheffield.ac.uk
Exacting community benefits from development can have important implications for distributional equity, social
justice and pathways into employment for disadvantaged households (Parks and Warren, 2009; Wolf-Powers,
2010). In countries like the UK, ‘planning gain’ and development taxes are increasingly covering the costs of
infrastructure that would previously have been paid for by the state (Campbell et al, 2000). As municipalities
with buoyant land markets can extract more than area of low demand and market failure, the net impact is to
reflect and reinforce growing socio-spatial inequalities. The ability of municipal governments and comminuty to
support effective local employment/hiring, training and skills obligations is also likely to be affected by concerns
about development viability and the reduced capacity within disadvantaged comminuty to provide the
institutional support to overcome barriers to employment. Competitive pressures, state fiscal austerity and
neoliberal pressure to reduce the ‘regulatory burden’ of planning, would all appear to constrain the power of
municipal authorities to lever community benefits from development (Peck and Tickell, 2010).
This paper draws on in-depth policy research funded by the UK Joseph Rowntree Foundation to examine and
reflect on the politics of leverage in relation to community benefits for places and people in poverty. The
research includes an extensive evidence review, a detailed study of 20 development projects across 4 municipal
authorities, and over 50 interviews with key stakeholders at local and national levels. A number of arguments are
made in the paper. First, questions are raised about the inequitable distributional outcomes that follow when

localised planning gain is intended to cover for shortfalls in state provision. Second, literature on Community
Benefits Agreements in the US has demonstrated the importance of local political mobilisation for social justice
outcomes, including the role of local government in negotiation and implementation (Wolf-Powers, 2010). The
paper charts the growing confidence of UK municipal authorities in exacting local employment and skills
agreements from major development projects over the last 5 years. This is traced to local political activism and
the incorporation of local hiring as part of the necessary portfolio of corporate social responsibility for firms and
contractors. In the UK the Public Services (Social Value) Act of 2012 has partially rolled back prevailing neoliberal
policy to allow municipal authorities to give greater weight to community benefits in local procurement. Local
employment and skills agreements can also lever in additional national state funding. Third, the paper develops a
framework for considering the various ways in which community benefits might be maximised for households in
poverty. In doing so the paper highlights the opportunities for proactive intervention, but also examines serious
challenges in making community benefits work for places and people who are most in need of additional support.
This is shown to be about the politics of state leverage in relation to planning gain and community benefits, but it
is also about the capacity of municipal governments and comminuty to assemble the personalised labour
market support needed to overcome barriers to work.
Overall the paper seeks to make a distinctive contribution to the theory and practice of community benefits
policy that draws on empirical research in the UK but also speaks to experience in North America. More broadly,
the research provides further evidence of the correlation between neoliberal (re)distributions of regulatory
power and growing socio-spatial inequality. The paper considers the meaning of recent changes in the UK for
broader trajectories of neoliberalisation and the politics of hope.
References
 Campbell H Ellis H Henneberry J & Gladwell C (2000) 'Planning obligations, planning practice, and land_use outcomes' Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 27(5) 759 – 775
 Parks V & Warren D (2009) 'The politics and practice of economic justice: community benefits
agreements as tactic of the new accountable development movement' Journal of Community Practice 17
(1-2)
 Peck J & Tickell A (2002) 'Neoliberalizing space' Antipode 34 (3) 380-404
 Saito L & Truong J (2015) 'The L.A. live community benefits agreement: evaluating the agreement results
and shifting political power in the city' Urban Affairs Review 51 (2) 263-289
 Wolf-Powers L (2010) 'Community benefits agreements and local government a review of recent
evidence' Journal of the American Planning Association76 (2) 141-159

Abstract Index #: 302
AN INVESTIGATION OF THE RESIDENTIAL LOCATION, LIFESTYLES AND MOBILITY CHOICES OF MILLENNIALS IN
CALIFORNIA, AND THE MOTIVATIONS AFFECTING THEM
Abstract System ID#: 940
Pre-organized Session: Broad Scale  impact of Millennials in the City
CIRCELLA, Giovanni [University of California, Davis] gcircella@ucdavis.edu, presenting author, primary author
BERLINER, Rosaria [University of California, Davis] aberliner@ucdavis.edu
FULTON, Lewis [University of California, Davis] lmfulton@ucdavis.edu
ALEMI, Farzad [University of California, Davis] falemi@ucdavis.edu
HANDY, Susan [University of California Davis] slhandy@ucdavis.edu
MOKHTARIAN, Patricia [University of California, Davis] plmokhtarian@ucdavis.edu
Recent research suggests that per-capita car travel seems to have “peaked” in recent years in the United States
as well as in other developed countries (Sivak, 2014). Young adults (“Generation Y”, or “Millennials”), in
particular, have demonstrated a rather drastic modification in their lifestyles and travel behavior. Among the
observed changes, younger travelers tend to postpone the time they obtain a driver’s license, often choose to
live in more central urban locations and choose not to own a car, drive less even if they own one, and use

alternative non-motorized means of transportation (Blumenberg et al., 2012; Kuhnimhof et al., 2012; Frändberg
and Vilhelmson, 2011).
Several possible explanations have been proposed to explain the observed behavioral changes of young adults,
including their preference for more urban lifestyles and locations closer to the vibrant parts of a city, the changes
in the household composition (e.g. postponing marriage and procreation), and the substitution of travel for work
and socializing with telecommuting and social media (Polzin et al., 2014). However, the debate in this field is
often dominated by speculations about the potential factors affecting millennials’ behavior. Several studies have
started to investigate the residential location and mobility choices of millennials through the analysis of
disaggregate data, but they are often limited by either the lack of information on specific variables of interest
(such as personal attitudes and preferences, in the case of studies based on the analysis of National Household
Travel Survey Data), or by the use of non-random samples (such as convenience samples drawn from university
students).
This study investigates the relationships among millennials’ residential location, lifestyles, travel behavior
patterns, their aspirations to purchase (and use) a vehicle, and the motivations behind them, through the analysis
of behavioral and attitudinal data collected with an online survey, created as part of the project, which is
distributed to a sample representative of the population of young adults in California.
The study investigates the impact of both classical (e.g. economic activity and  land_use patterns) and non-classical
(e.g. personal attitudes and preferences, adoption of technological solutions and new transportation modes, etc.)
variables on the lifestyles, residential location and mobility choices of young adults. We collect information on
personal attitudes and preferences (as they relate to social habits, lifestyles, adoption of technology,
environmental concerns, exercise/physical activity, etc.), transportation-specific attitudes (about mode
perception, comfort, time flexibility, etc.), interaction with peers and their expectations (i.e. peer pressure or
societal pressure), engagement in face-to-face and online social activities (and their role in shaping participation
in activities and travel for young adults), cultural background, commute behavior, limitations to travel (physical
disabilities, availability of a private car or bike, access to public transportation, availability of car- and bikesharing, ride-sharing services such as Uber, Lyft, etc.), residential location (urban vs. suburban, rural area,
neighborhood type, dwelling type, etc.), propensity to purchase a vehicle, and socio-demographic traits.
The study provides important insights into the role of several factors affecting the lifestyles, residential locations
and mobility-patterns of millennials in California. This paper presents preliminary results from the analysis of the
California’s dataset, and discusses the potential impact of millennials’ lifestyles and choices on the growth of
Californian city and future demand for transportation. Future extensions of this multiple-year research program
will expand the study to other states in the United States, and internationally, through the comparison of the
information collected in this dataset with the data collected for other regions.
References
 Blumenberg, E., B. Taylor, M. Smart, K. Ralph, M. Wander and S. Brumbaugh (2012) What's Youth Got to
Do with It? Exploring the Travel Behavior of Teens and Young Adults, UCTC-FR-2012-14, University of
California Transportation Center; available at www.uctc.net/research/papers/UCTC-FR-2012-14.pdf.
 Frändberg, L. and B. Vilhelmson. (2011) “More or less travel: personal mobility trends in the Swedish
population focusing gender and cohort”, Journal of transportation Geography, 19(6): 1235-1244.
 Kuhnimhof, T., J. Armoogum, R. Buehler, J. Dargay, J., J. Denstadli and T. Yamamoto (2012) “Men shape a
downward trend in car use among young adults — evidence from six industrialized countries”, Transport
Reviews, 32(6): 761–779.
 Polzin, S. E., X. Chu and J. Godfrey (2014) “The impact of millennials' travel behavior on future personal
vehicle travel”, Energy Strategy Reviews, 5: 59-65.
 Sivak, M. (2014). "Has motorization in the US peaked? Part 5: update through 2012". University of
Michigan, Technical Report, Transportation Research Institute.

Abstract Index #: 303
SHARED URBANISM? PLANNING, HOUSING AND AIRBNB IN TWO city

Abstract System ID#: 943
Individual Paper
GURRAN, Nicole [University of Sydney] nicole.gurran@sydney.edu.au, presenting author, primary author
PHIBBS, Peter [University of Sydney] peter.phibbs@sydney.edu.au
While urban congestion and housing affordability pressures afflict the world’s major city, spare capacity within
existing dwellings and transportation system lies untapped. Proponents of the burgeoning “share economy” claim the
movement can address these problems, by releasing latent space within existing homes and vehicles through
services such as Airbnb (short term accommodation) and Uber (ridesharing) (Hirschler and Zech, 2014). However,
there are growing questions about potential  impact on local housing supply, neighbourhood amenity, and public
safety, and very little scholarly research on the implications for urban policy and planning. This paper addresses
such questions, examining the so called “sharing economy” and its manifestation in city through a range of
practices which might collectively be termed “shared urbanism”. First, the paper develops a typology of shared
urbanism across accommodation, transport, energy, food, services, and other sectors, highlights potential
implications (opportunities, risks) for urban policy and planning frameworks, and draws on the emerging practice
literature (Sharable, 2013) to outline the range of regulatory responses that are emerging on the ground. Second,
the paper applies this framework to examine the specific case of Airbnb, an online “peer to peer” (as opposed to
“business to customer”) platform for short term accommodation within homes rather than hotels. Within five
years, Airbnb has grown to rival the world’s largest hotel firms in terms of capital value and accommodation
provision (Zervas et al., 2014), yet its assets remain dispersed and virtual, and its business model depends on the
willingness of strangers to lend/borrow their homes/rooms. While the company claims that the model helps
“hosts” afford their rents or mortgages, and brings local economic development to suburban neighbourhoods,
critics argue that Airbnb listings displace permanent accommodation in high demand city and disrupt residential
amenity (New York State Attorney General, 2014). This paper examines these issues, examining Airbnb listings in
two global city affected by chronic shortages of affordable housing – New York and Sydney. Using listings data
obtained via webscraping techniques, the paper examines 1) the ratio of permanent to Airbnb accommodation
listings in both city; 2) listings of whole apartments/homes, versus single rooms; 3) the number of multiple
listings by a single “host”/landlord; and 4) permanent versus episodic availability of listings. The analysis suggests
that platforms such as Airbnb may offer new opportunities for releasing spare capacity within the existing
housing stock and offer flexible sources of income to help renters and first home buyers, but that a strong policy
framework for monitoring  impact on the supply of lower cost permanent rental accommodation is needed in
high demand locations. Understood within the spectrum of emerging shared urbanism practices, and situated
within a strategic urban policy framework for maximizing the benefits and minimizing risks to safety and
residential character, the emergence of platforms such as Airbnb and more tailored services targeting
international students or seasonal workers, may offer new opportunities to address housing pressures in
suburban settings too, potentially supported by other sectors of the shared economy. However, rigorous,
evidence based research on the urban implications of these practices is needed to counterbalance claims made
by proponents of the $15 billion (Price Waterhouse Cooper, 2014) global enterprise.
References
 HIRSCHLER, P. & ZECH, S. Share it–Don’t Own it: Space Sharing as a Smart Solution for city and
Regions? REAL CORP 2014 Tagungsband, 21-23 May 2014, 2014 Vienna, Austria.
 NEW YORK STATE ATTORNEY GENERAL 2014. Airbnb in the City, New York, Attorney General, New York
State.
 PRICE WATERHOUSE COOPER 2014. The sharing economy: how will it disrupt your business?, London,
Price Waterhouse Cooper UK.
 SHARABLE, S. 2013. policy for Shareable city; A Sharing Economy Policy Primer for Urban Leaders,
Shareable, Sustainable Economies Law Center (SELC)
 ZERVAS, G., PROSERPIO, D. & BYERS, J. 2014. The rise of the sharing economy: Estimating the impact of
Airbnb on the hotel industry. Boston U. School of Management Research Paper

Abstract Index #: 304
ENVIRONMENTALLY SUSTAINABLE AND AFFORDABLE HOUSING NEAR TRANSIT IN LOS ANGELES
Abstract System ID#: 946
Individual Paper
BOARNET, Marlon [University of Southern California] boarnet@usc.edu, presenting author, primary author
RODNYANSKY, Seva [University of Southern California] rodnyans@usc.edu
BOSTIC, Raphael W. [University of Southern California] bostic@price.usc.edu
SANTIAGO-BARTOLOMEI, Raul [University of Southern California] raulsant@usc.edu
The twin issues of GHG emission reduction and housing affordability have long been seen as the key
opportunities and challenges of transit-oriented development (Cervero & Murakami, 2010; Freeman & Braconi
2007; Duncan, 2011). The transportation sector GHG emission reduction framework established by California’s
Sustainable comminuty and Climate Protection Act of 2008 (Senate Bill 375) has spurred a wave of research on
transit oriented development (TOD) by advocacy organizations, government entities, and academics. Los Angeles’
evolving rail transit system will transform neighborhood and travel patterns in the city, and linking TOD plans to
Los Angeles’ current housing crisis is a pressing need (Logan, 2014).
Los Angeles has begun to tackle these issues through a major investment in transit, with a particular focus on
light rail. The Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority (L.A. Metro) anticipates spending 58
percent of all funds on transit between 2005 and 2040 (L.A. Metro, 2009, p. 23). But planning for affordable and
environmentally sustainable housing near rail stations has lagged.
Against this backdrop, we ask two policy questions: (1) How can development near rail stations best produce
environmental benefits, particularly benefits consistent with state greenhouse gas emission reduction goals; and
(2) How can development near transit provide affordable housing without compromising on its transportation
goals?
Our paper takes a scenario-based approach in addressing these questions. We will first develop model
development scenarios based on expert opinion regarding optimal development patterns, knowledge of the Los
Angeles context, and a consideration of widely-recognized policy instruments for achieving both environment
and affordable housing goals, including incentive zoning, amended parking requirements, and subsidies. We will
then link these scenarios to GHG emission reduction by estimating the relationship between affordable housing
and vehicle miles traveled (VMT) using the most recent travel diary data for the LA region – the 2012 California
Household Travel Survey (CHTS). Together, these elements can produce station area templates to aid local and
regional planners in policy selection and station-area plan preparation.
References
 Cervero, R. & Murakami, J. 2010. “Effects on built environments on vehicle miles traveled: evidence
from 370 US urbanized area”. Environment and Planning A. 42, pp. 400-418
 Duncan, M. 2011. “The impact of transit-oriented development”. Urban Studies. 48:1, pp. 101-127
 Freeman, L. & Braconi, F. (2004) “Gentrification and Displacement New York City in the 1990s”. Journal
of the American Planning Association. 70:1, pp. 39-52
 L.A. Metro. 2009. “Long Range Transportation Plan”. Retrieved from:
http://media.metro.net/projects_studies/images/final-2009-LRTP.pdf
 Logan, Tim. (November 6, 2014). “Hitting Garcetti's goal of 100,000 new homes by 2021 won't be easy”.
Los Angeles Times. Retrieved from: http://www.latimes.com/business/realestate/la-fi-affordablehousing-20141107-story.html

Abstract Index #: 305
COLLABORATING TO ADDRESS COMMUNITY LIVING AND PARTICIPATION DISPARITIES AFFECTING PEOPLE
WITH DISABILITIES
Abstract System ID#: 950
Pre-organized Session: ADA PARC

HAMMEL, Joy [University of Illinois at Chicago] hammel@uic.edu, presenting author, primary author
MCDONALD, Katherine [Syracuse University] kemcdona@syr.edu
The American with Disabilities Act (ADA) marks a significant change in policy. However, that does not
automatically mean change is seen immediately or without challenges and misunderstandings, especially as
those unfamiliar with the disability movement or the needs and issues affecting people with disabilities, including
planning practitioners, researchers and educators. As a result, ADA has had varying degrees of impact and
success. Changing policy and practice, whatever the focus, can be slow, incremental and uneven. A goal of the
ADA PARC project is to work through and with the ADA centers to identify and address disparities. ADA Centers
are critical players in providing information, guidance and training on the ADA. They work with businesses,
government and individuals at local, regional and national levels. This paper will first review literature on system
change as it relates to ADA, including key policy pertaining to people with disabilities since 1990. The empirical
analysis will focus on the work of ADA centers and their collaboration with key stakeholders to show how they
can and are using the findings from the ADA PARC project to 1) identify key disparities in community living,
community participation and work and economic participation experienced by citizens with disabilities, 2) act
upon findings to make meaningful community and system change to address them. This includes thinking about
who to involve, at what scale(s) the collaboration should be operating and how each goes about determining the
issues to focus on. The paper will conclude with a discussion of common challenges and recommendations for
planning practitioners, educators and researchers.

Abstract Index #: 306
SCHOOL CONSOLIDATION AND ITS DISCONTENTS TO THE NEIGHBORING COMMUNITY: THE CASE OF
SHUTTERED SCHOOLS IN VILLAGE OF KENMORE, NEW YORK
Abstract System ID#: 1066
Individual Paper
ILHAMDANIAH, Ilhamdaniah [University at Buffalo, SUNY] ilhamdan@buffalo.edu
This paper will investigate the recent case of school consolidation and school closure in Kenmore-Tonawanda
School District (Ken-Ton) and it's effect on the nearby community and housing. Ken-Ton serving the Village of
Kenmore and City of Tonawanda, New York. The plan stipulates shuttering of a middle school and an elementary
school, only district schools located within the village of Kenmore. The residents and the village government have
been critical of the closures, citing disenfranchisement and loss of collective identity. Focusing on the complex
dynamics of the lengthy public process leading to the consolidation plan, the paper will explore the  impact of
the school closures on the spatial makeup of the village and the community. At the tail-end, I will propose
several possible scenarios to maintain the neighborhood quality and address the community concerns. The
research was conducted by qualitative approach utilizing content analysis method, as part of the research
conducted in the Architecture of Public Education course.
The population of the Town of Tonawanda, including the Village of Kenmore, plummeted by 31 percent from
1970 to 2010, from 107,000 to 73,500; and the school district enrollment has dropped nearly 20 percent since
the 1994-95 school-year. A consultant team hired by the district to came up with four scenarios of consolidation
in response to decreasing state funding and enrollment. Slated to commence in the 2015-2016 school-year, all
four consolidation plans would close Kenmore Middle School, one of the oldest buildings in the district. Three of
the plans would close Roosevelt Elementary, also located in the village of Kenmore. The school district is
currently finalizing the attendance zones.
To close two schools in the same community will effectively take the Kenmore out of the Ken-Ton School District;
and the Village Board believes that closing a second school in Kenmore would be detrimental to the village.
Named one of the “Top 10 Great neighborhood” in the United States by the American Planning Association in
2009, for its historic architecture, walkable design, accessibility, functionality, and for its community involvement;

loss of a neighborhood elementary school is a major blow. Given the expanding school attendance zones, pupils
have to be transported to schools outside the village and their neighborhood.
Ken-Ton School District Board conducted a series of public forums with the community to discuss all
consolidation scenarios. There is general agreement that the public has been relatively effective and gave voice
to different opinions. Current schools had been housing community services for the neighborhood, and it had
become the neighborhood anchor. The study regarding to school closure had been conducted by Taylor (2014),
showing how the shuttered school become the zombie-schools and bring negative effects to the nearby
neighborhood in Buffalo, the city bordering the Kenmore Village. From the perspective of the housing
community, Silverman (2014) also argued about anchoring community development to schools and
neighborhood. Therefore, good recommendations of the study would maintain a presence of the historic building
utilized for education purposes facility as identity of the village and propose alternative uses for the school
building to maintain the neighborhood quality and anticipate the concerns of spatial justice for the community.
References
 Taylor, Henry (2014). In Kelly L. Patterson and Robert M. Silverman. Editor (Ed.), Schools and Urban
Revitalization (pp. 109-135). New York: Routledge.
 Silverman, Robert (2014). In Kelly L. Patterson and Robert M. Silverman. Editor (Ed.), Schools and Urban
Revitalization (pp. 14-27). New York: Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 307
THE AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT AT 25: FRAMING THE PROBLEM AND TRANSLATING KNOWLEDGE FOR
THE urban_planning FIELD
Abstract System ID#: 959
Pre-organized Session: ADA PARC
FRIEDEN, lex [university of texas] lfrieden@bcm.edu, presenting author
KRAUS, Lewis [Public Health Institute] lkraus@centerondisability.org, primary author
The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) was signed into law July 26, 1990 after a long effort by advocates and
consumers to change. Now, 25 years later, new laws and regulations (and lawsuits; e.g., Olmstead v. LC, 1999)
have further shaped and expanded efforts to make comminuty more inclusive and accessible for people with
disabilities. While there are clear points where planning intersects with the regulatory and legal requirements of
the ADA, the spirit of the law is much broader and presents many new opportunities to engage with people with
disabilities. Furthermore, the shift toward participatory action research creates new ways of generating
knowledge that can be transferred to policy and practice. This paper will begin with an overview of the ADA
including its history and how it fits into the broader context of the disability movement. This will be followed by a
discussion of the state of the art in ADA Center work around community living, community participation, and
economic participation, and ways to expand the inclusion of people with disabilities in planning. The paper will
conclude with specific ideas for transferring the knowledge generated by the ADA PARC project into practice,
education and research including economic development, housing and transportation related planning concerns
affecting people with disabilities.

Abstract Index #: 308
RESIDENTIAL MOBILITY INTENTIONS BETWEEN MOVER AND NON-MOVERS: USING MULTI-LEVEL ANALYSIS
Abstract System ID#: 980
Individual Paper
CHOI, Yumi [The Ohio State University] choi.610@osu.edu, presenting author, primary author
HANLON, Bernadette [The Ohio State University] hanlon.42@osu.edu

Residential mobility decisions have been identified in previous studies and most factors that affect the decisions
were socio-economic characteristics of households and living environments. One of the important factors that
determine residential mobility decision is satisfaction level with the current neighborhood and home (Clark,
Deurloo & Dieleman, 2006; Clark & Ledwith, 2006). Although there are abundant research on the residential
mobility decisions, there are few studies about the different elements associated with moving intentions of
movers and non-movers (Woo & Morrow-Jones, 2011). Moreover, the residential mobility studies by using a
multi-level analysis has very scant empirical evidence.
This study examines the factors that increase the likelihood of moving decisions and intention both by their socioeconomic characteristics, environment conditions, and satisfaction level on housing/neighborhood in Franklin
County, Ohio of U.S. in 2004. This study extends the earlier studies to explore the different features between the
non-movers and movers who actually moved within 2 years after the survey conducted. Both movers and nonmovers had higher level of satisfaction on their current neighborhood and home but we also found something
different facts from the descriptive analysis. Movers’ age has bigger variances, live in older/cheaper/smaller
housing, also live in neighborhood with less opportunities on education, job access, public safety, affordable
housing, accessibility to shop, public health, and affluent neighborhood.
In future work, we apply multi-level analysis to explore how the level of intention to move are expected to be
different by geographical levels, individual households (level 1), neighborhood and school districts (level 2), and
they are also similar within the same groups due to the cluster effect. Therefore, the multi-level modeling is
applied for non-movers (667 responders, 85.29%) and movers (115 responders, 14.71%) using the survey data
collected by Center for Urban and Regional Analysis in the Ohio State University in 2004.
References
 Clark, W.A.V., Deurloo, M.C., & Dieleman, F.M. (2006). Residential mobility and neighborhood outcomes.
Housing Studies, 21, 323–342.
 de Groot, C., Mulder, C. H., Das, M., & Manting, D. (2011). Life events and the gap between intention to
move and actual mobility. Environment and Planning-Part A, 43(1), 48.
 Kim, M. (2010). Residential Location Decisions: Heterogeneity and the Trade-off between Location and
Housing Quality (Doctoral dissertation, Ohio State University).
 Morrow-Jones, H. A., & Wenning, M. V. (2005). The housing ladder, the housing life-cycle and the
housing life-course: upward and downward movement among repeat home-buyers in a US metropolitan
housing market. Urban Studies, 42(10), 1739-1754.
 Woo, M., & Morrow-Jones, H. A. (2011). Main factors associated with homeowners' intentions to move.
International Journal of Urban Sciences, 15 (3), 161-186.

Abstract Index #: 309
EXPLORING THE EFFECTS OF HOME ENERGY ASSISTANCE FOR LOW-INCOME FAMILIES
Abstract System ID#: 991
Individual Paper
SHAMSUDDIN, Shomon [University of Wisconsin-Madison] shomon@mit.edu
Cities are faced with the rising challenge of providing affordable housing and improving access to opportunities
for low-income residents. Recent attention has examined the effects of living in wealthy or poor neighborhood,
while overlooking the influence of housing environments (Briggs et al., 2010). Additionally, traditional housing
assistance focuses on rent, but families must also pay for other housing costs including utility expenses.
This research explores the relationship between home energy assistance program and housing conditions for
low-income families. Theory and previous work suggest that residential stability and conditions are important for
a range of outcomes, including physical health, emotional well-being, and social ties (Anderson et al., 2014;
Newman, 2008). This paper addresses the following questions: (1) What are the effects of home energy
assistance on residential stability? (2) Does home energy assistance have positive  impact on health?

I use multivariate analysis, including a regression discontinuity design, to compare similar households who differ
in their probability of participating in the program. I find that home energy assistance has a positive effect on
families staying in their homes. In addition, I find evidence that home energy assistance is associated with
reduced medical costs. The results have implications for new ways of integrating affordable housing, energy use,
and community health.
References
 Anderson, S., T. Leventhal, S. Newman, and V. Dupere. (2014). “Residential Mobility Among Children: A
Framework for Child and Family Policy.” Cityscape 16(1): 5-36.
 Briggs, X., S. Popkin, and J. Goering. (2010). Moving to Opportunity: The Story of an American
Experiment to Fight Ghetto Poverty. New York: Oxford University Press.
 Newman, S. (2008). “Does Housing Matter for Poor Families? A Critical Summary of Research and Issues
Still To Be Resolved.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 27(4): 895-925.

Abstract Index #: 310
CREATING INDEXES TO UNDERSTAND DISABILITY DISPARITIES AT DIFFERENT SCALES
Abstract System ID#: 998
Pre-organized Session: ADA PARC
SMITH, Janet [University of Illinois at Chicago] janets@uic.edu, presenting author, primary author
FOGG, Louis [University of Illinois at Chicago] Louis_Fogg@rush.edu
The ADA PARC project brings together data used in community planning, public health, environment studies,
and disability studies to better understand disparities in community living, community participation, and
economic participation at different scales – nation, state and selected city. While the mapping out of these data
provides a rich visual and empirical base for identifying issues and for discussion of strategies to employ locally, it
does not necessarily provide a firm baseline for understanding how well overall a jurisdiction (state or city) is
doing when it comes to community living, community participation and economic participation. A goal of the ADA
PARC project is to provide tools that can be used to identify policy questions as well as to monitor change over
time as new strategies and policy are implemented. To this end, a set of indexes have been developed that can
be used to benchmark and score geographies along dimensions of community living, community participation
and economic participation. Benchmarking allows comparisons to be made between groups as well as over time.
Using nationally available data, we produced and tested a set of indexes using various approaches including
simple scorecard, weighted and other composite measures. These data were assessed for covariance and other
measures and the indexes were tested for robustness, and risk ratios were generated. This paper will begin with a
review of the literature on index development and benchmarking and how each can be used in planning and
policy making. The indexes developed for the ADA PARC project will be reviewed to demonstrate specific
strategies, logic and techniques used. Implications for further research and potential use in policy and planning
arenas will be discussed.

Abstract Index #: 311
INTENTIONAL comminuty AND THE DIGITAL AGE: PARTICIPATION AND AUTHENTICITY IN LAS VEGAS'
DOWNTOWN PROJECT
Abstract System ID#: 1003
Individual Paper
SHANNON, Brettany [University of Southern California] bkshanno@usc.edu
From the start, various groups in what is now the United States have formed “intentional comminuty” based
around shared visions. At key moments in the country’s development, these utopic visions, with their emphasis
on egalitarianism and authenticity, have taken on greater importance and visibility. In modern America, perhaps

the greatest concentration of intentional comminuty emerged from the tumult of the 1960s, responding to the
nation’s social revolution. Political communes and cults proliferated, and individualistic “New Communalists
turned away from political action and toward technology and the transformation of consciousness as the primary
sources of social change” (Turner 2006, p. 4)
How do participation and authenticity manifest in intentional comminuty of the digital age? To answer this, I
conduct a case study of a current-day descendant of the New Communalists, Las Vegas’ Downtown Project (DTP).
DTP was initiated in 2012 “to transform Downtown Las Vegas into the most community-focused large city in the
world…by inspiring and empowering people to follow their passions to create a vibrant, connected urban core”
(Downtown Project, 2015) Funded by Zappos CEO Tony Hsieh, the development’s much-beloved “guru,” DTP has
all the principles or elements of an intentional community (Miller 2010). First, residents coalesce around a shared
vision they believe to be beyond the mainstream. DTP residents embrace Hsieh’s “delivering happiness”
philosophy, the belief that the prioritization of happiness in one’s own work and life has multiplier effects in the
world at large. Next, the group members live on a bounded property with a cohesive design. DTP’s real estate
investments comprise the purchase of existing properties, and purposively or not, together they mimic the shape
of Hsieh’s most admired animal, the llama. And finally, DTP’s very raison d’etre is economic: it aims to position
Las Vegas as among the country’s most vital tech startup hubs.
I argue that DTP grapples with two critical contemporary planning issues: digital participation and planning
“authenticity.” First, in accordance with its tech startup utopianism, DTP has a robust online presence, including a
dedicated website, various social media outlets, even a smartphone app. But do they offer genuine participation?
Second, related to the concept of authenticity, DTP’s identity as real estate development and technophilic idyll
exemplifies the “politics of ambivalence” Banet-Weiser (2012) sees when “both economic imperatives and
‘authenticity’ are expressed and experienced simultaneously” (p. 5). Do DTP’s online platforms demonstrate this
ambivalence? How? Are efforts made to negotiate it?
Starting in December 2013 and continuing on a bimonthly basis through August 2014, I extracted all DTPproduced new media content for constant-comparative-directed content, visual, and discourse analysis. Using
this cache, I analyze how DTP participants use different emergent media to promote the project, how they
perceive the project internally, and whether online participation appears to direct the project’s larger processes.
In addition, I code mentions of authenticity, the media used to convey it, individuals and businesses represented,
and the strength of consumerist messaging. Finally, I interview DTP stakeholders and conduct further content
analysis of contemporaneous press coverage to glean the community’s regard for participation and peculiar
brand of authenticity.
Current urban renewal projects bear some of the hallmarks of intentional comminuty, and this research on DTP
provides useful lessons for planning. It interrogates to what extent online engagement, even amongst the willing,
equates to genuine participation in planning. By tracking the construction of “authenticity,” it reflects when and
how economic imperative supersedes social agenda. Are our egalitarian utopias egalitarian at all? Or are they
libertarian, pro-capitalist enclaves?
References
 Banet-Weiser, S. (2012). Authentic TM: The politics of ambivalence in a brand culture. New York and
London: New York University Press.
 Downtown Project. (2015). Careers. Retrieved from http://www.downtownproject.com/careers/
 Miller, T. A matter of definition: Just what is an intentional community. Communal Societies: Journal of
the Communal Studies Association 30(1): 1-15.
 Turner, F. (2006). From counterculture to cyberculture: Stewart Brand, the Whole Earth network, and
the rise of digital utopianism. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
 Zukin, S. (2010). Naked city: The death and life of authentic urban places. New York: Oxford University
Press.

Abstract Index #: 312
UNDERSTANDING LEADERSHIP IN COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT THEORY AND PRACTICE
Abstract System ID#: 1012
Individual Paper
GARCIA ZAMBRANA, Ivis [University of Illiniois at Chicago] ivis.garcia@gmail.com
There is a long history of examining leadership—from Plato, Socrates, and Aristotle, progressing to Weber,
Machiavelli and others—and although the literature on this topic is quite vast, basic questions have centered
around: what characterizes a leader, their motivations, approaches, effectiveness, and decision-making processes
(Burns 2010; Bass and Riggio 2005). Leadership, as opposed to management or delegation, is predisposed to
addressing “wicked problems” for which no cause or effect could be determined and where scientific
methodologies prove partial and cursory in their results (Rittel and Webber 1973). The following paper will
evaluate the importance of collective and egalitarian decision-making in addressing complex social problems that
cannot resolved definitively (Grint 2010). More specifically, in the field of planning, I engage with recent
scholarship that has come to emphasize the importance of leadership to effectively address the needs of
communities and implement strategies that result in desired long-term changes (Forester 2013).
Research findings are based on 17 oral histories of Puerto Rican leaders in the context of Chicago working in the
field of community development. Based on the findings of the study, interviewees assumed leadership roles
because of a specific social context they experienced. For example, they spoke about developing a deep concern
for the socio-economic conditions of minorities in the city of Chicago after experiencing poverty, discrimination
or sexism first hand. These leaders usually shared stories of struggle, resiliency and awakening—becoming
empowered and deciding to change the system. Interviewees emphasize the idea of relentlessly following a
general path rather than a concrete goal. The path would become clearer as time went by as long as they pursue
this more abstract vision of the future and encourage others to do the same.
Interviewees suggest a path-dependency approach in planning—as many leaders spoke about one opportunity
leading to the next and so forth, about making mistakes and learning by trial and error. Another element these
leaders emphasized is how they learned to think collectively, ask for help, recognize others, listen and use
ingenious knowledge to solve the problems at hand. This article also seeks to move from individual leaders to
formulate a theory for the collectivization of leadership. Finally, the paper will conclude with some
recommendations regarding leadership development in community-based practice. This research is part of a
large-scale effort of the Center for Puerto Rican Studies to document in video form the oral histories of 100
Puerto Ricans who have made a difference in their comminuty across the United States.
References
 Bass, Bernard M., and Ronald E. Riggio. 2005. Transformational Leadership. 2nd edition. Mahwah, N.J:
Psychology Press.Possibilities of Facilitative Leadership. 1st edition. Chicago, IL: APA Planners Press.
 Burns, James M. 2010. Leadership. 1st edition. Harper Perennial Modern Classics.
 Forester, John F. 2013. Planning in the Face of Conflict: The Surprising Possibilities of Facilitative
Leadership. 1st edition. Chicago, IL: APA Planners Press.
 Grint, Keith. 2010. Leadership. Oxford; New York: OUP Oxford.
 Rittel, Horst W. J., and Melvin M. Webber. 1973. “Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning.” Policy
Sciences 4 (2): 155–69.

Abstract Index #: 313
CHANGING PATTERNS OF SOCIAL VULNERABILITY IN THE MULTI-HAZARD ENVIRONMENT OF HOUSTON:
EVALUATING THE ROLE OF SUBSIDIZED LOW-INCOME HOUSING program
Abstract System ID#: 1025
Individual Paper

KASHEM, Shakil [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] kashem1@illinois.edu, presenting author, primary
author
WILSON, Bev [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] bevwilso@illinois.edu
Prior research has extensively evaluated the efficacy of subsidized low-income housing program in
deconcentrating poverty as well as their influence on both households and comminuty. However, very few
studies have explored the extent to which these housing program have affected the hazard exposure of
vulnerable populations (e.g., Cutter et al. 2001; Houston et al. 2013). This paper hypothesizes that by ignoring the
multi-hazard context of urban area, subsidized low-income housing program have failed to reduce the overall
hazard exposure of socially vulnerable populations and to some extent, have contributed to an increased level of
hazard exposure. Similar to other large U.S. city, Houston also faces environment justice challenges as a result
of disproportionately placing technological hazards (e.g., polluting facilities) in area occupied by lower income
groups and non-whites (Bullard & Wright, 1993; Chakraborty et al., 2014). The process through which this uneven
geography of hazard exposure is created and maintained needs to be better understood, particularly within a
multi-hazard coastal environment like Houston and as the  impact of climate change and adaptation planning
continue to gain attention from planning scholars and practitioners (Blanco et al., 2009). By examining two of the
most popular housing subsidy program, Housing Choice Vouchers (HCV) and the Low Income Housing Tax Credit
(LIHTC), this paper explores the ways in which these housing subsidies influenced neighborhood social
vulnerability in Houston between 2000 and 2010. Both natural and technological hazard exposures are measured
at the census tract level using publicly available data from the U.S. environment Protection Agency (EPA) and
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Both of these housing program were found to have
contributed to a disproportionately high (relative to the overall population) presence of subsidized low-income
housing units in both natural and technological hazard area. However, the results of the spatial econometric
analysis indicate that the supply-oriented subsidy provision of the LIHTC program significantly increases
neighborhood social vulnerability when located in technological hazard area. These findings warrant more
careful scrutiny by planners when placing subsidized housing, particularly how administrative decisions like these
may influence the hazard exposure of vulnerable populations and exacerbate environment justice issues.
Finally, the limitations of market-oriented housing program that lack adequate safeguards for avoiding
hazardous area are highlighted and potential remedies are suggested.
References
 Blanco, H., Alberti, M., Olshansky, R., Chang, S., Wheeler, S. M., Randolph, J., Watson, V. (2009). Shaken,
shrinking, hot, impoverished and informal: Emerging research agendas in planning. Progress in Planning,
72(4), 195–250. doi:10.1016/j.progress.2009.09.001
 Bullard, R. D., & Wright, B. H. (1993). environment justice for all: community perspectives on health
and research needs. Toxicology & Industrial Health, 9, 821–841.
 Chakraborty, J., Collins, T. W., Grineski, S. E., Montgomery, M. C., & Hernandez, M. (2014). Comparing
Disproportionate Exposure to Acute and Chronic Pollution Risks: A Case Study in Houston, Texas. Risk
Analysis. doi:10.1111/risa.12224
 Cutter, S. L., Hodgson, M. E., & Dow, K. (2001). Subsidized Inequities: the Spatial Patterning of
Environmental Risks and Federally Assisted Housing. Urban Geography, 22(1), 29–53. doi:10.2747/02723638.22.1.29
 Houston, D., Basolo, V., & Yang, D. (2013). Walkability, transit access, and traffic exposure for lowincome residents with subsidized housing. American Journal of Public Health, 103(4), 673–8.
doi:10.2105/AJPH.2012.300734

Abstract Index #: 314
IMMIGRANTS SHARED FIRST: OLD PROBLEMS AND NEW REGULATIONS IN THE URBAN
Abstract System ID#: 1033
Individual Paper
SARMIENTO, Carolina [University of California, Irvine] csarmien@uci.edu, presenting author
KIM, Anna [Georgia Institute of Technology] anna.kim@coa.gatech.edu, primary author

Recently, new profitable models of "sharing" have emerged in many US city. The efforts of companies that
facilitate the sharing of housing (airbnb) and travel (uber/lyft) first were applauded for being creative, clever, and
much more efficient and pleasant than the traditional options. Many comparisons were made that highlighted
the benefits of casually linking hip, creative, young and interesting people, who happened to be doubling as
landlords and car drivers, with other hip, creative people who happened to be looking for a place to stay and a
"lift" to somewhere. And yet, much of what was being sold or "shared" in newly digitized packages through
home-sharing websites and mobile apps, is actually an old practice. In fact, in most of the same city where
airbnb and uber have become popular and lucrative, are almost identical practices among poor people,
immigrant people, and other people of color: home-sharing, ride-sharing, informal lending out or renting out of
cars and rooms.
Previous research finds that immigrant subsistence and governance strategies have largely been rendered
invisible and if not, criminalized (Valenzuela 2001; Morales 2009). Furthermore, while immigrant practices are
often penalized, the new models of the sharing economy have had significant  impact on organized labor, much
of which also supports immigrant service workers. The loud campaigns for regulation and equally loud arguments
against regulation of these new creative sharing models and their existence alongside organized labor raises
significant questions around the contributions of immigrant economies, immigrant forms of organization, and
political power. This article examines how previously villianized immigrant practices can also be seen as viable,
replicable, and sustainable in the same way the new sharing economy has been popularized in the media. This
research broadens the current policy and planning debates on the sharing economy to include historically viable
yet marginalized comminuty and practices while also contributing to research on economic development in
minority comminuty.
References
 Valenzuela Jr., Abel. 2001. “Day Laborers as Entrepreneurs?” Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies.
27(2): 335-352
 Ong, P. M., & Loukaitou-Sideris, A. (Eds.). (2006). Jobs and economic development in minority
communities. Temple University Press.
 Robinson, David, Kesia Reeve, and Rionach Casey. The housing pathways of new immigrants. York:
Joseph Rowntree Foundation, 2007.
 Morales, Alfonso. 2009. Public Markets as Community Development Tools Journal of Planning Education
and Research.
 Mukhija, V., & Loukaitou-Sideris, A. (Eds.). (2014). The Informal American City: Beyond Taco Trucks and
Day Labor. MIT Press.

Abstract Index #: 315
THE MULTIPLE MEANINGS OF BLIGHT FROM INJUSTICE AND SOCIAL DISORDER TO RECLAMATION OF VACANT
PROPERTIES AND URBAN REGENERATION.
Abstract System ID#: 1040
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session
SCHILLING, Joseph [Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State University] jms33@vt.edu
COWELL, Margaret [Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State University] mmcowell@vt.edu
WAY, Heather [University of Texas Law School] HWay@law.utexas.edu
Blight is a complex term with a long and contested past. Blight offers a shorthand way to visualize neighborhood
decline through the lens of vacant lots, abandoned buildings, graffiti, unsafe streets, etc. Blight can also serve as
the legal grounds for redevelopment projects where the use of eminent domain imposed disastrous
consequences for many comminuty of color through the urban renewal era. Social scientists and public health
experts analyze the relationship of physical and social disorder with crime under the infamous rubric of the
broken window theory.

Recently a growing number of city have launched anti-blight campaigns and blight remediation initiatives—
giving blight a new frame—to address the proliferation of vacant and abandoned homes caused by the
cumulative effect of long term postindustrial decline, shrinking population, and the mortgage foreclosure crisis.
In 2014 Detroit gained nationwide attention for the release of its Blight Remediation Framework. New Orleans’
Blight-Stat pioneered the use of data and performance measures to track blighted properties. NGOs such as the
Center for Community Progress and Pennsylvania Housing Alliance regularly convene practitioners and
policymakers to share best places and advocate for policy changes to help comminuty tackle blight.
This roundtable will explore the multiple meanings of blight research and contemporary practices, covering such
topics and questions as: What are the latest methods for tracking the costs and  impact of blight? As a socioeconomic phenomenon, is blight the cause or the symptom of broader socio-economic phenomenon, such as
poverty and racial injustice? How do comminuty, planners, and policymakers develop effective policy strategies
and legal tools to address blighted properties?
In March 2015 the Vacant Properties Research Network released a national literature review on blight drawing
together over 300 academic literature and practitioner reports (85% since 2000) to systematically assess the
nature of blight, the effects, and the factors that have shaped its development and how the meaning of blight
shifts with the times and the place. The discussants will highlight this lit review’s key findings and compare it with
policy and practices in Texas. This session will focus on the legal, policy, and planning dimensions of nuisance
abatement in the reclamation and reuse of vacant properties—perhaps the most recent and pervasive
manifestation of blight.
References
 Weaver, R.C. (2013) Re-framing the Urban Blight Problem with Transdisciplinary Insights. Ecological
Economics, 90(1), 168-176.
 Tisher, E. (2013). Re-stitching the urban fabric: Municipal driven rehabilitation of vacant and abandoned
buildings in Ohio’s Rust Belt. Vermont Journal of environment Law, 15(1), 1`73-193.
 Lind, K.J. (2011). Can public nuisance law protect your neighborhood from big banks? Suffolk University
Law Review, 44(4), 89-137
 Gold, M.E. & Lynne B.S. (2011). The use and abuse of blight in eminent domain. Fordham Urban Law
Journal, 38(4), 1119-1174.
 Plyer, A. & Ortiz, E. (2012). Benchmarks for Blight: How much blight does New Orleans Have? Greater
New Orleans Community Data Center

Abstract Index #: 316
GETTING OUT OF THE 'HOOD: EVALUATING THE ECONOMIC AND SPATIAL MOBILITY BENEFITS OF THE FAMILY
SELF-SUFFICIENCY PROGRAM
Abstract System ID#: 1049
Individual Paper
ANTHONY, Jerry [University of Iowa] jerry-anthony@uiowa.edu
Background: When the U.S. federal public housing program was created in the 1930s, it was envisioned that
public housing would provide low-cost and reasonable quality shelter to needy families for a short period of time
(Hayes 1995). Assisted families were expected to improve their economic status and leave public housing.
However, since the 1970s, it was evident that many families that received housing assistance stayed on it (Hayes
1995; Rohe & Kliet, 1997; Sard, 2001). And over time housing assisted families became concentrated in lowincome, low-opportunity neighborhood.
Family Self-sufficiency (FSS) program are designed to help housing-assisted families to transition to economic
self-sufficiency, become independent of housing and welfare assistance, and seek rental and ownership housing
in the private sector. The creation of FSS program marked a fundamental shift from low-income housing policy’s

traditional focus on getting families into housing projects or on housing assistance program (Nenno, 1991). In
2013, over 80% of local housing authorities in the U.S. had an operational FSS program.
The research reported in this paper examined a) whether FSS program graduates were better-off financially than
those that were not, and b) whether FSS program graduates were able to relocate to better neighborhood in the
private housing market.
Relevance of this research: The problems associated with spatial concentrations of poverty are well-documented
(Rainwater, 1980; Wilson, 1987). None of the large-scale federally supported housing assistance program in the
U.S have thus far had significant success in spatially dispersing assisted families. There have been several limited
scale, housing mobility program such as the Moving-To-Opportunity program. These too have had limited
success in enabling assisted families move to higher opportunity neighborhood. But FSS program graduates can
search for both rental and ownership housing in the private market without the stigma of being “government
aided” and without the restrictions that government aid comes with. For the first time in the history of federal
housing program, a concerted effort is underway to help low-income families make housing choices in this
unfettered way. FSS program can thus enable low-income families living in concentrated pockets of poverty
either in housing projects or Housing Choice Voucher supported housing to relocate to better neighborhood.
But whether FSS program actually do so has never been examined.
Research Design: The research examined program graduates of one FSS program – the City of Clearwater,
Florida’s Partners in Self-Sufficiency program. I used individual and family data in a pre-test/post-test quasiexperimental research design with control groups.
The research questions that guided this study were:
1. Do FSS program graduates find ownership or rental housing in the private sector in dispersed locations away
from spatial concentrations of poverty?
2. What factors correlate with success in the FSS program with success defined as a) graduating from the program
and b) moving to a “better” neighborhood?
Data: Detailed demographic data was made available by the FSS program administering agency. This included
information on age, family size, income, residential address, rent or mortgage payment, and educational skills.
Methodology: Multiple logistic regression techniques are well suited for analysis of categorical data and were
used in this research. To eliminate alternate hypotheses and control for labor and housing market effects over
the duration of the quasi-experiment a control group was used.
References
 Rohe, W. and Kleit, R. (1999). Housing and Welfare Reform and Self-Sufficiency: An Assessment of the
Family-self Sufficiency Program. Housing Policy Debate 10(2): 333-69.
 Sard, B. (2001). The Family Self-Sufficiency Program: HUD’s Best Kept Secret for Promoting Employment
and Asset Growth. Washington D.C.: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
 Anthony, Jerry. 2005. Family Self-sufficiency program: Program benefits and factors affecting
participants’ success. Urban Affairs Review 41(1): 65-92.
 Nenno, M. (1991). Housing, Public Welfare and Human Services: New Progress Toward Integrated
Systems. In Family Self-sufficiency: Linking Housing, Public Welfare and Human Services, ed. National
Association of Housing and Redevelopment Officials/American Public Welfare Association. Washington,
DC: National Association of Housing and Redevelopment Officials.
 Wilson, W. (1996). When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor. New York: Alfred A.
Knopf.

Abstract Index #: 317
IRRATIONAL EXUBERANCE AT CITY HALL? HOUSE PRICE GROWTH AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT SPENDING
Abstract System ID#: 1050
Individual Paper

MONKKONEN, Paavo [University of California, Los Angeles] paavo@luskin.ucla.edu, presenting author, primary
author
LENS, Michael [University of California, Los Angeles] mlens@ucla.edu
Local governments were hit hard in the Great Recession, as real property tax revenues fell and states cut back on
local aid. Importantly, the housing boom may have led many local governments to make overly optimistic
spending decisions intensifying the recession’s impact. City revenues are exposed to rising home prices through a
number of channels including, most rapidly, real estate transfer taxes and property related fees. In this paper, we
estimate the extent to which local governments consumed were spurred by out of the dramatic increases in
housing wealth that occurred in many jurisdictions during the housing boom to increase spending.
We have constructed several sets of house price indices for thousands of city across the country, and appended
data from three waves of the U.S. Census of Governments. Using these data, we run a set of models informed by
the literature on the marginal propensity to consume out of housing wealth and public finance, acknowledging
the differences between households and local governments. Importantly, we control for local characteristics such
as economic base and access to different and flexible revenue sources. We also exploit variation in the use of real
estate transfer taxes.

Abstract Index #: 318
MAPPING OUT THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING COMPLEX IN SANTA ANA, CALIFORNIA
Abstract System ID#: 1084
Individual Paper
SIMS, J. Revel [University of Wisconsin-Madison] revel.sims@gmail.com, presenting author, primary author
SARMIENTO, Carolina [University of California, Irvine] csarmien@uci.edu
Producing subsidized affordable housing through Low Income Housing Tax Credits (LIHTC) requires a number of
relationships and transactions. Since the program was established, these transactions have become less risky and
relationships more secure. Research has also shown that LIHTC projects often generate positive effects for
neighborhoods. However recent research has also shown that in one case, the LIHTC system functions as a
contradictory affordable housing complex (AHC) that mobilizes subsidized affordable housing to facilitate the
interests of developers and politicians rather than increasing affordability.
This paper builds on a case study of LIHTC housing production in Santa Ana, California, from 2008 to 2014 and
uses spatial analysis, participant observation, surveys, and interviews in order to: 1) to shed light on the actors
and relationships that help produce and regulate the complex; 2) to understand the conditions and rent burdens
on residents in LIHTC projects; and 3) to better understand the impact of LIHTC projects on neighborhood
property values. Through in-depth and semi-structured interviews with key actors including property owners, real
estate agents, and both for profit and nonprofit developers, as well as surveys of residents in LIHTC projects, this
research takes a more intimate perspective on the complex set of relationships and interests that significantly
impact low-income residents, housing, and neighborhood conditions.
References
 McClure, K. (2006). The low-income housing tax credit program goes mainstream and moves to the
suburbs. Housing Policy Debate, 17(3), 419-446.
 Frisch, M. & Servon, L.J. (2006). CDCs and the Changing Context for Urban Community Development: A
Review of the Field and the Environment. Journal of the Community Development Society, 37(4), 88108.

Abstract Index #: 319
POSSIBILITIES FOR LOW-INCOME HOME REPAIR program AS A LEVERAGE POINT FOR environment
JUSTICE IN GENTRIFYING URBAN ENVIRONMENTS
Abstract System ID#: 1098
Individual Paper
WALSH, Elizabeth [University of Texas at Austin] Elizabeth.A.Walsh@utexas.edu
Central Theme: Our home environments pose a number of challenges for environment justice. Healthy homes
in healthy neighborhood are often inaccessible due to socioeconomic factors (Hood, 2005), environment
racism (Bullard et al., 2007), and/or environment gentrification (Banzhaf & McCormick, 2006). Publicly funded
home repair program increasingly strive both to improve environment health conditions and to reduce energy
bills at the household level. Home repair program have also been implemented to stimulate reinvestment at the
neighborhood-level (Whalley, 1988). More recently, the City of Austin has invested funds in home repair
programs to ensure that low-income homeowners can enjoy healthy, safe, and energy efficient home
environments in the face of gentrification pressure. While such program do not represent a silver-bullet solution
to the accessibility of healthy housing, the question remains: “what is the potential of low-income home repair
programs to serve as a leverage point for environment justice in urban home environments facing gentrification
pressure?”
Methodology: To address this question, I conducted performance evaluation case studies of three municipally
funded, low-income home repair program in Austin, Texas intended to ameliorate gentrification and advance
outcomes related to environment justice. Two program were designed for one neighborhood that experienced
environmental racism in its past and currently faces environment gentrification. Case studies included
participant observation of home repair program, key informant interviews with program leaders, and 104
interviews with homeowners who received services (including 33 semi-structured, dialogue interviews in which
homeowners shared detailed accounts of their experiences of home repair, patterns of inhabitation, and
perspectives on neighborhood change).
Relevance: The results have important implications for planning practice and scholarship. With regard to the
design of home repair program, results suggest that while Return On Investment (ROI) and energy savings are
important, they can be counterproductive as singular performance goals. Such narrowly framed goals can
contribute to a fragmented approach to home repair with missed opportunities for integrated health and
environmental performance enhancement at multiple scales. Furthermore, a holistic conception of
environmental justice (including distributive equity, procedural justice, recognition, and capabilities (Schlosberg,
2009)) as a goal appears to support the design and implementation of program with higher performance at the
household and neighborhood levels. Similarly, results from the dialogue interviews suggest that the underlying
frames through which households view their home environments is a significant (yet often overlooked) driver of
home performance. A key finding is that “regenerative dialogue assessments” of homes before and after home
repair can reveal (and potentially shift) such frames, augment capacity for adaptive home management, and
advance holistic intervention design. Such assessments engage both the technological and social system of the
home environment in order to advance health and ecological performance.
References
 Banzhaf, H. S., & McCormick, E. (2006). Moving Beyond Cleanup: Identifying the Crucibles of
Environmental Gentrification. SSRN eLibrary. Retrieved from
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=990074
 Bullard, R. D., Mohai, P., Saha, R., & Wright, B. (2007). Toxic Wastes and Race at Twenty: 1987—2007 (p.
175). Cleveland, OH: United Church of Christ Justice & Witness Ministries. Retrieved from
http://www.ucc.org/assets/pdfs/toxic20.pdf
 Hood, E. (2005). Dwelling disparities: How poor housing leads to poor health. environment Health
Perspectives, 113(5), A310–A317. doi:10.1289/ehp.113-a310





Schlosberg, D. (2009). Distribution and Beyond: Conceptions of Justice in Contemporary Theory and
Practice. In Defining environment Justice: Theories, Movements, and Nature. New York: Oxford
University Press, USA.
Whalley, D. (1988). Neighborhood variations in moderate housing-rehabilitation program  impact - an
accounting model of housing quality change. Economic Geography, 64(1), 45–61.

Abstract Index #: 320
DOWNTOWN REDEVELOPMENT PLANS: ERASING & IMAGINING comminuty
Abstract System ID#: 1107
Individual Paper
GONZALEZ, Erualdo [California State University, Fullerton] egonzalez@fullerton.edu
There is a budding attraction of U.S. city officials and urban elites in “bringing back” creative and middle class
populations to urban downtown cores. These downtowns were previously all but abandoned by government and
the private sector for over half a century and where ethno-racial and working-class populations have since largely
been shopping and living. In many cases, current scholarship on commercial gentrification stem from these
processes. Yet, missing from this body of work is a critical discourse analysis of the extent that downtown urban
development plans address class and cultural aspirations of Mexican, immigrant, and working-class consumers
when they were the majority immediately after the 1960s civil rights era and in the more present time while
undergoing gentrification. Using the Southern California City of Santa Ana, this paper examines two downtown
development plans from two distinct time periods, 1974 and 2007, using discourse analysis. The paper’s first
objective is to briefly review the similarities and differences of factors driving the need for downtown
redevelopment and generating controversy. The second objective is to explore the extent that the 1974
Downtown Santa Ana Development Plan (DSADP) and the 2007 Santa Ana Renaissance Specific Plan (RP) address
cultural and class commercial needs and aspirations of the majority Mexican community. As a whole, the DSADP
overwhelmingly promoted the Mexican community as a problem-- delinquent and illegal and overwhelmingly
erased it as a target for downtown consumption, while the RP not only erased it as a target consumer, but also
promoted the community as both a problem and an asset, and neutralized it. We conclude that regardless of
time period, urban_planning discourse remains much the same—largely inattentive to rights to the downtown for
the most marginalized. Moreover, present day planning mechanisms, such as form-based codes/physical design
and creative class programming help construct, privilege, and bring back a reimagined community.
References
 Foucault M, 1991, ``Governmentality'', in The Foucault Effect: Studies in Governmentality
 González, E. R., and Lejano, R. P. 2009. New Urbanism and the Barrio. Environment and Planning A,
41(12), 2946-2963.
 Richard Florida, city and the Creative Class. New York: Routledge, 2005.
 Tom Slater, “Missing Marcuse: On Gentrification and Displacement,” in city for People, Not for Profit:
Critical Urban Theory and the Right to the City, ed. Neil Brenner, Peter Marcuse, and Margit Mayer. New
York: Routledge, 2012, 171–196.
 Susan Fainstein, “New Directions in Planning Theory,” Urban Affairs Review 35, no. 4 (2000): 451–478.

Abstract Index #: 321
COMMUNITY AND URBAN GREEN SPACES: A CASE STUDY ON HOW PEOPLE FROM CAPETILLO IN RIO PIEDRAS,
PUERTO RICO APPROACH AN URBAN FOREST.
Abstract System ID#: 1114
Poster
VEGA-FONTANEZ, Hagmel A. [University of Puerto Rico] hagmel.vega@upr.edu, presenting author, primary
author
RODRIGUEZ ORTIZ, Natalia [University of Puerto Rico] lalapr7@gmail.com

CATALA, Argenis [University of Puerto Rico] argenis84@live.com
MENDEZ, Roselyn [University of Puerto Rico] roselyn.mendez@gmail.com
CASTILLO, Pedro Hansel [University of Puerto Rico] hansel.estudios@gmail.com
The city of the 21st century are multicultural and diverse, with spaces that provide a variety of uses and services
for its inhabitants. The urban public and green spaces in the city provide social and ecological services such as
recreation, improving public health, reducing energy costs and improving the general environment of the
communities (Atiqul Haq 2011). The public and green spaces in the city are relevant in developing a livable city
as they provide both social and psychological benefits that promote the well-being of its inhabitants. (Chiesura
2004).
For the past 30 years, policy and development patterns encouraged an urban transformation that affected the
integrity of the city negatively. These transformations created a social division by benefiting some groups and
marginalizing others. Some people were forced to establish comminuty with extreme poor conditions and
unhealthy environment (Dimuro & Manuel 2011). In other words, these transformations created a panorama of
inequality and social and territorial exclusion. Thus, the most socially and environmently degraded area of the
city are within the comminuty with less economic resources.
Urban comminuty in the city of San Juan, Puerto Rico, have been experimenting uneven problems throughout
history. The community of Capetillo in Rio Piedras, San Juan is an example of it. The Capetillo community has
experienced an urban transformation process that resulted in the devolvement of several environmently
degraded area. Through a collaborative effort with the University of Puerto Rico and community leaders, an
urban space used before as an illegal landfill was transformed into an urban garden and forest. Despite the effort,
community members do not broadly use these green spaces. However, public reasoning and the formation of
social points of view and values are decisive in environment issues (Sen in Scholtes 2010).
Our work is an experimental research that focuses on exploring the values and perceptions of some community
members, leaders and active users toward the green spaces. We will use socio-ecological qualitative research
techniques like direct observation, surveys and interviews in order to understand the community’s dynamics. The
aim of this work is to provide recommendations for the administration of these green area and their project
with the intention to developing an environment education program and a co-management process with the
community, the University of Puerto Rico and the Municipality of San Juan.
As co-management is a model whose main feature is the distribution of functions, duties, authority and benefits
among different entities, we suggest that this method, by which the State and civil society share responsibility for
managing a common area, is the most appropriate for the community to feel empowered to take over this public
space by not only using it but also managing it. The relevance of this work is based in the importance of
understanding the community's dynamics in order to advance a procedure to developing a livable city.
References
 Atiqul Haq, S. M. (2011) Urban green spaces an integrative approach to sustainable environment.
Journal of environment Protection, 2011,2 601-608.
 Chiesura, A. (2004) The role of urban parks for the sustainable city. Landscape and urban_planning 68.
129-138.
 Dimuro, G & de Manuel, E. (2011) La agricultura urbana como proceso de desarrollo a escala humana:
Los huertos en zonas degradadas de Sao Paulo. N-AERUS XII (Network-Association of European
Researchers on Urbanization in the South). Madrid. Spain
 Scholtes, F. 2010. ‘Whose Sustainability? environment Domination and Sen’s Capability Approach’,
Oxford Development Studies 30(3), 289-307.

Abstract Index #: 322
SIMULATING DISPLACEMENT PRESSURES FROM TRANSIT INVESTMENTS
Abstract System ID#: 1111

Pre-organized Session: Disadvantaged and Displaced in California
WADDELL, Paul [University of California Berkeley] waddell@berkeley.edu, presenting author, primary author
MAURER, Samuel [University of California, Berkeley] maurer@berkeley.edu
Displacement of low-income and minority comminuty is a growing concern for planners in strong markets such
as in California, aggravated by rapidly rising home prices and insufficient housing production. Many Metropolitan
Planning Organizations (MPOs) are turning to computer models to inform their long-term  land_use and
transportation planning, such as UrbanSim, but these models currently lack the ability to realistically represent
the processes of residential displacement.
This paper describes a component of an ongoing project funded by the California Air Resources Board, to improve
the capacity of operational models in use by MPOs in California to predict displacement pressures within
neighborhoods from investments in transit and policy to concentrate development around these transit
investments, as well as to enable simulation of the  impact of housing affordability policy intended to mitigate
displacement pressures.
Micro-simulation models forecast  land_use change based on the economic and behavioral choices of households,
employers, and property developers, in response to policy and market contexts. For simplicity, household
relocation is typically determined by lifecycle factors such as the stage of life cycle, and income – two factors
highly correlated with move rates. For purposes of analyzing displacement pressures, however, these factors
exclude rent burdens and other factors that might reflect gentrification and displacement pressures.
In this paper, we first estimate empirical models linking households’ relocation choices to their rent-to-income
ratio, controlling for lifecycle and socio-demographic characteristics. We provide results for both the San
Francisco Bay Area and a larger national sample. Then, we demonstrate how these results can be incorporated
into a regional-scale simulation model by altering the model’s specification of household move predictions. We
demonstrate increased sensitivity to rising rents via simulation tests, producing aggregate outcomes where rising
housing costs contribute to the displacement of lower-income residents from a neighborhood, as we see in
practice.
We find that a household’s rent-to-income ratio is a strong predictor of its choice to relocate, and that the
magnitude of this effect varies systematically with income level. Regional  land_use models can be effectively
augmented to capture this process.
Other components of this research effort that will be addressed include refinement of the models of household
location choice to better capture realistic budget constraints for renters and owners, which helps to capture
another form of displacement, via exclusion. We also are augmenting attributes of existing housing to reflect
tenure and housing units covered by affordable housing policy such as rent control.
The final component of this research that will be explored is the refinement of the pro forma-based simulation of
housing development, to reflect the influence of housing policy such as inclusionary zoning, density bonuses,
and subsidies for affordable housing.
References
 Waddell, Paul. UrbanSim: Modeling urban development for  land_use, transportation, and environment
planning, Journal of the American Planning Association 68 (3), 297-314
 Waddell, P., G.F. Ulfarsson, J. Franklin and J. Lobb. Incorporating  land_use in Metropolitan
Transportation Planning, Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice Vol. 41 (382-410). 2007.
 Waddell, Paul (2011), Integrated  land_use and Transportation Planning and Modeling: Addressing
Challenges in Research and Practice, transportation Reviews, Vol. 31, No. 2, pp 209 – 229. March 2011

Abstract Index #: 323
JUST TRANSITIONING: THE FINE LINE BETWEEN NEIGHBORHOOD CHANGE AND DISPLACEMENT
Abstract System ID#: 1132
Individual Paper
CHAPPLE, Karen [University of California, Berkeley] chapple@berkeley.edu
Playing out in the media, as well as academia, is a contentious debate over whether gentrification is positive or
negative. To the extent that it causes displacement of existing residents, gentrification threatens both equity and
sustainability goals (Chapple 2014). But the displacement of retail and commercial businesses is often viewed as a
more natural process, or a simple consequence of residential gentrification (Kennedy and Leonard 2001; Freeman
2006). Yet, retail change may displace businesses involuntarily, and also serve as a visible reminder of loss that
shapes the local narrative of the neighborhood (Freeman 2006).
Research on business gentrification is scarce. Chapple and Jacobus (2009) analyzed the relationship between
demographic changes and business establishment changes, finding that overall retail establishment growth was
mostly associated with neighborhood becoming middle- or upper-income rather than those that became bipolar
or gentrified (Chapple and Jacobus 2009). Most recently, Meltzer and Schuetz (2012) analyzed changes among
neighborhood businesses in New York City between 1998 and 2007, finding that retail access improved rapidly in
low home value neighborhood that experienced upgrading or gentrification.
This study will investigate the process of business turnover in the context of neighborhood change. I ask, to what
extent are business transitions voluntary, who are the winners and losers, and to what extent are outcomes
unjust? Using the National Establishment Time Series employed by most previous studies, the study will first
determine what “natural” rates of business turnover are in California’s metropolitan area, based on patterns of
succession. Then, comparing gentrifying and non-gentrifying neighborhood, I will look at business births, deaths,
expansions and contractions. A regression analysis will analyze whether, in gentrifying neighborhood, existing or
new businesses benefit most (in terms of sales and employment). Preliminary results suggest that, indeed, it is
the new businesses that grow fastest – but only in certain tyes of markets.
Finally, using a case study of the Mission district in San Francisco, I examine the issues of justice and
sustainability. This analysis will be based on the frameworks introduced by Fainstein (2010) and Agyeman (2013),
and expanded on by Chapple (2014). Here, preliminary results suggest a process of rapid transformation spurred
by both public and private investment. The paper concludes by considering the types of policy, specifically,
community benefits, that are appropriate in retail districts undergoing change.
References
 Agyeman, J. (2013). Introducing Just Sustainabilities: policy, planning, and practice. Zed books.
 Chapple, Karen. 2014. Planning Sustainable city and Regions: Towards More Equitable Development.
Oxford: Routledge.
 Chapple, K., & Jacobus, R. (2009). Retail trade as a route to neighborhood revitalization. Urban and
Regional Policy and its Effects, Nancy Pindus, Howard Wial, and Harold Wolman (Eds.).
 Freeman, L. (2006). There goes the hood: Views of gentrification from the ground up. Temple University
Press.
 Meltzer, R., & Schuetz, J. (2011). Bodegas or bagel shops? Neighborhood differences in retail and
household services. Economic Development Quarterly,

Abstract Index #: 324
BEYOND JUST LIGHT BULBS: THE MITIGATION OF GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS IN THE HOUSING SECTOR IN
MEXICO CITY
Abstract System ID#: 1153
Individual Paper

REYES-SANCHEZ, Ariadna [The University of Texas at Austin] ariadna.reyes@utexas.edu
Climate change is a serious global challenge that urgently demands comprehensive mitigation policy that ought
to address the contribution of the housing sector to climate change (Fuller & Crawford, 2011). Nevertheless,
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions assessment in the housing sector is particularly challenging because in addition
to construction and daily use of housing units, urban_planning factors such as density, location of jobs, and transit
services also influence energy use and GHG emissions (Norman, Maclean, Asce, & Kennedy, 2006). Therefore, for
mitigation strategies in the housing sector to be effective, they must be based on a comprehensive
understanding of the complex nature and extent of GHG emissions associated with housing development and use
(Ramesh, Prakash, & Shukla, 2010).
Mexico City is one of the largest metropolitan area in the world, and thus it could enable a better understanding
of climate change policy in the global south. The Mexican federal government has implemented housing-related
strategies for mitigating GHG emissions by promoting, subsidizing, and financing the purchase of energy efficient
technologies such as electricity-saving bulbs and solar water heaters (SEMARNAT, 2012). However, these
mitigation strategies do not address GHG emissions stemming from the rapid growth of housing developments
on the urban periphery. In the last two decades, federal government-financed dwelling units have been
developed on a massive scale in the urban fringe of Mexico City, unaccompanied by public transportation
services and nearby jobs (United Nations, 2011). This has led to increasing automobile use and attendant
increase in GHG emissions, as residents in these distant housing developments are required to commute to
central locations that offer services and employment opportunities. In order to assess the impact of location and
transportation on GHG emissions in the housing sector in Mexico City, a pioneering Life Cycle Assessment (LCA)
was conducted to compare energy use related to both construction and use of dwelling units. The LCA revealed
that the use of gasoline for private transportation is the principal contributor to GHG emissions, followed by the use of
electricity and gas, respectively.
These results call into question the Mexican federal government’s focus on energy efficient technologies to
mitigate GHG emissions instead of encouraging urban_planning and  land_use policy that support government
financing of dwelling units in the central city. One possible avenue for GHG emissions mitigation in the housing
sector that integrates planning tools and technological innovations is densification of central area with resourceefficient dwelling units. Beyond the case of Mexico City, this investigation suggests that LCA represents a
powerful methodological approach to develop comprehensive GHG emission baselines for the housing sector,
which in turn can serve to encourage effective urban_planning policy for mitigating GHG emissions in the
housing sector.
References
 Fuller, R. J., & Crawford, R. H. (2011). Impact of past and future residential housing development
patterns on energy demand and related emissions. Journal of Housing and the Built Environment, 26,
165–183. doi:10.1007/s10901-011-9212-2
 Norman, J., Maclean, H. L., Asce, M., & Kennedy, C. A. (2006). Comparing High and Low Residential
Density : Life-Cycle Analysis of Energy Use and Greenhouse Gas Emissions, (March), 10–21.
 Ramesh, T., Prakash, R., & Shukla, K. K. (2010). Life cycle energy analysis of buildings: An overview.
Energy and Buildings, 42(10), 1592–1600. doi:10.1016/j.enbuild.2010.05.007
 SEMARNAT. (2012). Quinta Comunicación Nacional ante la Convención Marco de las Naciones Unidas
sobre el Cambio Climático. Retrieved from http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/mexnc5s.pdf
 United Nations. (2011). Estado de las Ciudades de México 2011. México, D.F.

Abstract Index #: 325
THE VALUE OF MOUNTAIN IN RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES - IN THE CONTEXT OF A RAPIDLY URBANIZED CITY;
SEOUL, KOREA
Abstract System ID#: 1168
Individual Paper

YOON, Heeyeun [Seoul National University] hyyoon@snu.ac.kr
In the post World War II and the Korean War period, Seoul has experienced rapid urbanization, as seen in many
other city of Asian countries in the same world political position. At the incipient phase of modern economic
development without sufficient transportation means, Seoul has become a highly centralized capital. Formal
property development has concentrated on flat lands, and mountainous area were a home of informal
residential settlements due to the hardship in construction with limited technologies. After the decades-long but
unsuccessful effort to clear the area, the city government awarded permits to the current residents and
legalized their occupancy in order to address housing shortage as well as to provide necessary public
infrastructure for the substandard housing within those area. Since then, the housings on hilly area became one
of the settlements types in Korea, called san-dong-neh or dal-dong-neh (mountain town or moon town,
respectively).
As Seoul has developed substantially, concerns on living environment, health and leisure becomes higher,
consequently desires to be near nature have increased. While Seoul has not sprawled at the same rate as
western city with equivalent level of wealth, thus suburban housing developments did not provide residents
with proximity to nature, I believe natural area within Seoul has become a target for property development
instead. I observe that mountain towns, once built on relatively cheaper land, are now recognized not only for its
great potential as land for redevelopment but also for the highly valued land with natural environment. The
current property development pattern in the area differs drastically from the old ones; in the past, one-story
small -detached house without private yard is the dominant housing type, while now developers use zoning
variance to get higher FAR (Floor Area Ratio) and built high rises in the hope to extract the highest and the best
value from the land.
In this research, I define a new housing development pattern in Seoul, Korea and quantify how they are valued
differently due to the proximity to the natural environment, the mountain. In the previous studies, land value is
determined by a set of attributes including slope and size of lots, proximity to infrastructure, proximity to major
arterial roads that make constructions convenient and commuting easy. The value of nature has offset some of
the factors on property development that had been previously believed as limitations. The main methodology is
hedonic modeling with pooled cross-sectional data from 2006 to the present (2015). The Main dataset is both of
the property transaction value and assessed land value. Housing type, developers, location factors are considered
together with the main effect of nature on property values. Also other land valuation model –such as contingent
valuation and travel cost methods will be introduced to enrich the discussion.
References
 O'sullivan, A. (2007). Urban economics. McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
 O'Sullivan, A., & Gibb, K. (Eds.). (2008). Housing economics and public policy. John Wiley & Sons.
 Costanza, R., Wilson, M. A., Troy, A., Voinov, A., Liu, S., & D'Agostino, J. (2006). The value of New Jersey's
ecosystem services and natural capital.
 Tyrväinen, L. (1997). The amenity value of the urban forest: an application of the hedonic pricing
method. Landscape and urban_planning, 37(3), 211-222.
 Harvey, J., & Jowsey, E. (2004). Urban land economics. Palgrave Macmillan.

Abstract Index #: 326
PUBLIC HOUSING AUTHORITIES AND THE PROVISION OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING: ASSESSING FLEXIBILITY,
CONSTRAINT, AND STANCE IN STATE ENABLING LEGISLATION
Abstract System ID#: 1178
Individual Paper
AIRGOOD-OBRYCKI, Whitney [The Ohio State University] airgood-obrycki.1@osu.edu, presenting author
KLEIT, Rachel [The Ohio State University] kleit.1@osu.edu, primary author

Since the 1980s, neoliberalism has led to devolution of affordable housing policy to the local level, an increased
dependence on both for- and non-profit housing providers, and an increased role for states (Schwarz, 2007).
Local housing providers, both for- and non-profit. Throughout the US, a number of public housing authorities
(PHAs) also play role in this local context in the provision of affordable housing, doing so in cooperation with or in
parallel to other local actors. At the same time, PHAs abilities may vary state-to-state because of differences in
state-level public-housing-enabling legislation that specifies the not only processes for creating housing
authorities and but also delineates PHAs’ powers. This paper investigates the impact of small but meaningful
differences in the legal enabling environment, which may in turn cause variations in PHA’s provision of affordable
housing outside of the HUD assisted stock.
States are a crucial and documented scale for housing innovation and administration, supporting affordable
housing development through trust funds and tax credit program (Basolo & Scally, 2008; Stegman, 1999). State
policy can give PHAs the flexibility to enact creative solutions for financing housing development (Kleit & Page,
2008). Innovation or restrictions in state policy and legislation can therefore impact activities at the local level
(Reese & Malmer, 1994). Given the importance of the state level, enabling legislation has the potential to
produce great variation in the structure of PHAs and the activities that they undertake.
To understand and document the differences in state enabling legislation, we conducted a conventional content
analysis. For each of the 48 contiguous states, we collected the housing authority legislation from the state
revised code. We initially read the documents, inductively creating codes for common elements of the legislation;
this process provided a basic understanding of the structure and components of enabling legislation. We found
both small and large differences between states, requiring a finer scale of coding. We thoroughly compared the
state enabling documents, specifically coding for all differences and similarities.
Finally, we developed codes to categorize the differences as elements of flexibility, constraint, and stance.
Flexibility represents aspects of the legislation that provide powers and multiple approaches to housing
provision. Constraints are comprised of explicit limitations on what PHAs can do. These include regulations on
income ranges or populations that a PHA can serve. The stance reflects the overall tone of the legislation toward
affordable housing and tenants. We summarized the contents of each state’s enabling legislation and used the
coding process to categorize states according to the degree of flexibility and constraint in the legislation. We
developed a typology of state stances that emerged from the content analysis.
This research contributes to the understanding of state legislative environments, their impact on the local
functioning of public housing authorities, and the potential for public housing authorities to be key actors in local
housing provision.
References
 Basolo, V. & Scally, C.P. (2008). State innovations in affordable housing policy: Lessons from California
and New Jersey. Housing Policy Debate, 19(4), 741-774.
 Kleit, R.G. & Page, S.B. (2008). Public housing authorities under devolution. Journal of the American
Planning Association, 74(1), 34-44.
 Reese, L. A., & Malmer, A. B. (1994). The effects of state enabling legislation on local economic
development policy. Urban Affairs Review, 30(1), 114-135.
 Schwartz, A.F. (2010). State and local housing policy and the nonprofit sector. In Housing policy in the
United States (pp. 209-238). New York: Routledge.
 Stegman, M.A. (1999). State and local affordable-housing program: A rich tapestry. Washington, D.C.:
Urban Land Institute.

Abstract Index #: 327
WHAT IS THE CONSTRAINT OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROVISION?
Abstract System ID#: 1184
Individual Paper

SHOJAEI, Reyhaneh Sadat [University of Sheffield] r.shojaei@sheffield.ac.uk
The Tehran housing market is both the largest and most complicated housing market in Iran. Exceptionally, Iran’s
housing market is the one economic arena that is dominated almost solely by the private sector, with 97% of new
houses provided by individuals and private companies. The number of new housing projects has reached a
historic low, with Tehran currently facing a shortage of 100 000 units per year. In addition, some existing
properties remain abundant due to low affordability of low and middle-income households and land and housing
prices reaching an all-time high.
A wide variety of private agencies and public institutions that are active in unstable politico-economic
environments make understanding the operation of this market difficult. Market failure and followed by
unsuccessful government policy, has caused housing issue become a national crisis.
Therefore, this research for the first time concerned with enhancing deep understanding of Tehran housing
supply throughout the qualitative methodology, which comprised interviewing 50 key actors including
previous housing minister, district mayor, different types of builders and companies and bank manager. In
addition three housing projects selected as case studies to find constrains in the housing development process.
Within this uniquely Iranian ̋context ̏, the structuration theory presented by Giddens (1979, 1984) and the
structure and agency model devised by Healey (1992) are employed to illustrate the duality of structure and
agency and consequently providing a much richer insight into the variety and complexity of housing
developments. Subsequently, the following results were found; firstly, findings revealed how the structural
factors affect the individual agents҆ strategies and behavior and vice versa. Secondly, part of the failure of
government policy related to wrong understanding of affordable housing and the attitude to provide it.
Thirdly, applying the Structure and Agency model in dramatically different context shows that it is necessary to
focuses more on local knowledge in planning studies and planners need to consider the local context as a crucial
factor in housing provision.

Abstract Index #: 328
LAND CONTROL TOOLS FOR COMMUNITY SUSTAINABILITY: LAND BANKS OR COMMUNITY LAND TRUST IN
HOUSTON, TEXAS
Abstract System ID#: 1185
Individual Paper
KING, Lester [Rice University] kingl2@gmail.com, presenting author, primary author
LOWE, Jeffrey [Texas Southern University] lowejs@tsu.edu
Planning in the US is still forging new ways to integrate sustainable development, which is recognized as a
comprehensive mantra for development planning (Berke & Manta-Conroy, 2000; Campbell, 1996). The American
Planning Association (APA) has only recently assembled a task force to establish a standard for developing
comprehensive plans which meet the intent of sustainable development (APA, 2010). Jepson & Haines (2014)
provided some work in this area through reviewing zoning ordinances to understand integration of sustainable
development goals. Still, a dearth of information exists in the literature on the confluence of sustainable
development and  land_use regulations. This paper contributes to closing this gap in the literature. Specifically, the
paper offers a focus on tools for the control of  land_uses to combat gentrification in Houston, Texas.
The paper employs a qualitative analysis approach. Specifically, the paper provides and analysis of existing land
use regulations and redevelopment tools. Some archival data will also be collected in order to provide a
longitudinal assessment of sustainability as a priority in Houston.
The paper is composed of four parts. The first part establishes a theoretical basis for addressing gentrification
through identifying and discussing area of sustainability that address gentrification. The second portion of the
paper explains the local usage of existing tools to combat gentrification, and presents subsequent outcomes

including social disparities; conflicting policy; and citizen engagement. The third part introduces land banks and
community land trusts (CLTs) as possible  land_use tools to combat gentrification, enhance sustainability, and
promote social justice in Houston, Texas. The paper closes with recommendations for greater attention to be
given to CLTs as a model that better advances the confluence between  land_use control and sustainability, and a
better quality of life for the city’s lower-income residents.
References
 APA, 2010. APA's Sustainaing Places Initative. [Online] Available at:
https://www.planning.org/sustainingplaces/ [Accessed October 2013].
 Berke, P. & Manta-Conroy, M., 2000. Are we Planning for Sustainable Development? An Evaluation of 30
Comprehensive Plans. Journal of the American Planning Association, pp. 21-33.
 Campbell, S., 1996. Green city, growing city, just city? urban_planning and the contradictions of
sustainable development. Journal of the American Planning Association, 62(3), pp. 296-312.
 Jepson, E. & Haines, A., 2014. Zoning for sustainability: A review and analysis of the zoning ordinances of
32 city in the United States. Journal of the American Planning Association, 80(3), pp. 239-252.

Abstract Index #: 329
APPRECIATING AUTHENTIC SOCIAL PARTNERSHIPS THAT ENABLE WELLNESSAND SOCIAL JUSTICE: UNPACKING
SUCCESSES BY LEARNING FROM REAL PLACES
Abstract System ID#: 1188
Individual Paper
GURSTEIN, Penny [University of British Columbia] penny.gurstein@ubc.ca, presenting author
TATE, Laura [Community Action Initiative] ltate@communityactioninitiative.ca, primary author
If properly claimed, authenticity is a powerful concept that can be used to progressive ends. There is something
almost poetic that immediately resonates with the notion of authenticity. The word authentic provides a
shorthand that people immediately “get”, even if the term can be problematic and its exact meaning remains
elusive and at times contested and divisive.
In her book The Naked City, Sharon Zukin explores authenticity in a place-base context, taking up where
luminaries in the 1960s such as Jane Jacobs and Herbert Gans left off in their exploration of neighbourhood
authenticity. These place-based explorations hit home for more and more city dwellers who watch as beloved
neighbourhoods become unrecognizable in the face of rapid growth.
Our paper will begin by summarizing Zukin’s place-based appreciation of authenticity and looking at how some of
her lessons can be applied to social planning. Social planning is often a more slippery concept to appreciate
because its impact is less visual compared with urban design or growth management. In particular, we will
extrapolate and test key elements of Zukin’s understanding of the concept against two case studies from projects
funded by the British Columbia-based Community Action Initiative.
The first of these case studies involved a project led by the Hollyburn Family Services Society in North Vancouver
and involved partnerships with two local First Nations – the Squamish First Nation and the Tsleil Waututh First
Nation – to deliver much needed mental health and substance use outreach services to both Aboriginal and nonAboriginal residents in the community, particularly where there had been experiences of involvement with the
criminal justice system. The second case study involved a project led by Long Term Inmates Now in the
Community. This included partnerships with groups including the local municipality, the District of Mission, to
help expand a highly successful program to enable formerly incarcerated people to become more connected to
their community by growing organic produce for sale in local farmers markets. Proceeds went to fund victim
services program.
By exploring the degree of authenticity of connection to place and the partnerships created through the
programs, our article will aim to: 1) to expand and deepen the discussion of authenticity and ways it can be

applied to a place-based context; 2) to discern why some authentically framed mental wellness interventions
work for certain client groups; and 3) to suggest some preliminary criteria that might be useful in setting up an
authenticity-informed approach to community development work in a social planning context.
Our article will draw significantly on Zukin’s work, but we will also round out her analysis with contributions with
concepts from both a capabilities approach to place-making (Zitcer, 2014) and actor network theory (Letour,
2007).
References
 Zukin, Sharon. (2010). Naked City. The Death and life of authentic urban places. Oxford University Press:
Oxford and New York.
 Berman, Marshall. (1970). The Politics of Authenticity: Radical Individualism and the Emergence of
Modern Society. Athenium: New York
 Latour, Bruno (2007). Reassembling the Social. An Introduction to Actor-Network Theory. Oxford
University Press: Oxford.
 Zitcer, Andrew. (2014). A Capabilities Approach to Arts and Culture. Presentation at the 2014 Association
of Collegiate Schools of Planning Conference, Philedelphia, P.A.

Abstract Index #: 330
IMPLEMENTING COMPREHENSIVE NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION program (CNRPS): A CASE STUDY OF
FIVE NEIGHBORHOOD INITIATIVE area IN PHOENIX, AZ
Abstract System ID#: 1202
Individual Paper
ZHANG, Eva [Arizona State University] evazhang417@gmail.com, presenting author, primary author
GOLUB, Aaron [Arizona State Unversity] aaron.golub@asu.edu
KAMEL, Nabil [Western Washington University] Nabil.Kamel@wwu.edu
Beginning in 1974, the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program annually allocates federal grants to
entitlement comminuty, allowing municipalities and comminuty to design their own strategies to reverse
deleterious trends in neighborhood. The CNRPs with concentrated investment have been designed to better
meet the needs of local neighborhood than very widely dispersed CDBG spending –described as “spreading the
peanut butter” (Briggs, 2014). While many research claimed that CNRPs have brought dramatic improvements in
targeted area, especially on housing conditions and property values (Galster, Tatian, & Accordino, 2006; Galster,
Walker, Hayes, Boxall, & Johnson, 2004; Pooley, 2014), substantial criticism point to inequality and inefficiency in
programs’ revitalizing strategies and implementations (Bostic, 2014; Briggs, 2014). The objective of this research
is to examine institutional design of CNRPs and its political, social, and economic consequences through a
detailed evaluation of five Neighborhood Initiative area (NIAs) – implemented by the City and local
neighborhood organizations over the past 20 years.
In particular, we examine structural and functional features of CNRPs and characters of public/private
partnership among city officials, neighborhood organizations, citizens, and local businesses. Our research
question is: “what are the impact of CNRPs institutional design on investment distribution and program
outcome?” Our hypothesis is that spending and benefits of CNRPs are both uneven across social groups within
each neighborhood, as well as between neighborhood. We suspect that local character of planning, demands on
volunteer time, variations in neighborhood leadership and coordination shape program outcomes in addition to
socio-economic and demographic changes. We also expect that CNRPs have become innovative ways of planning
and promoted local decision-making process that increased quantity and quality of participation and civic
engagement among local residents.
Our research employs a qualitative method approach based on secondary literature, program reports,
neighborhood development plans, and investment inventory. It is also based on observations of collaborativesponsored meeting and relevant neighborhood activities, and interviews with community leaders, stakeholders,

residents, and city officials in each CNRP. Findings from this analysis will allow us to better understand issues in
CNRP designs and operations, and its  impact on distribution of investment and resources. The research will
provide important implications for policy makers to demand additional attention, refinement, and participations
on the future CNRP plans and revitalization actions.
References
 Bostic, R. W. (2014). CDBG at 40: Opportunities and Obstacles. Housing Policy Debate, 24, 297–302.
 Briggs, X. D. S. (2014). Looking Back and Looking Ahead: CDBG and the Future of Federal Urban Policy.
Housing Policy Debate, 24(1), 303–309.
 Galster, G., Tatian, P., & Accordino, J. (2006). Targeting Investments for Neighborhood Revitalization.
Journal of the American Planning Association, 72(4), 457–474.
 Galster, G., Walker, C., Hayes, C., Boxall, P., & Johnson, J. (2004). Measuring the Impact of Community
Development Block Grant Spending on Urban neighborhood. Housing Policy Debate, 15(4), 903–934.
 Pooley, K. (2014). Using Community Development Block Grant Dollars to Revitalize neighborhood: The
Impact of Program Spending in Philadelphia. Housing Policy Debate, 24(1), 172–191.

Abstract Index #: 331
IMPACT OF SCHOOL QUALITY ON HOUSE PRICES
Abstract System ID#: 1214
Individual Paper
MATHUR, Shishir [San Jose State University] shishir.mathur@sjsu.edu
Central theme or hypothesis
While several studies have empirically estimated the impact of school quality on house prices; none parses out
the house price effect of elementary, middle and high schools. Second, the existing studies primarily show a
modest impact of school quality on house prices. For example, Nguyen-Hoang and Yinger’s (2011) review of
recent empirical literature reports a 1-4 percent increase in house price for every one standard deviation increase
in student test scores. However, I hypothesize that the recent immigrants to the San Francisco Bay Area,
especially those with high-paying jobs in the technology sector, put a higher premium on school quality. Further,
their higher household incomes allow them to bid aggressively for houses in good school districts. Therefore, in
this research, I expect to see a significant impact of school quality on house prices; for households in very good
school districts, a monetary impact that is comparable to the cost of the alternative to public schools—private
schools. This hypothesis is supported by the empirical literature that shows that higher income households put a
higher premium on school quality compared to lower income households (Ries and Somerville, 2010).
Research question
Controlling for other factors, what is the impact of school quality on house prices?
Approach and methodology
A review of empirical literature shows strong support for the use of boundary-discontinuity design method
(BDDM) to tease out the effect of school quality on house prices (for example, see Bayer, Ferreira and McMillan,
2007; Fiva and Kirkeboen, 2008). BDDM teases out the effect of school boundary change on house prices by
regressing the prices of homes that are on either side of a school attendance area boundary on the structural and
locational attributes of the house and the neighborhood-level attributes. Other econometric approaches include
spatial regression models, instrumental variable regression approach, and repeat sales approach. Indeed,
Nguyen-Hoang and Yinger’s (2011) call for using a variety of approaches to check the robustness of the results.
This study uses several of these approaches.
Relevance of work to planning education, practice, or scholarship
Estimation of the impact of school quality on housing prices informs households’ sorting behavior in a housing
market. This sorting has important policy implications. For example, it might result in racially and economically
segregated neighborhood (Bayer, Ferreira and McMillan, 2007). Further, to the extent homes in the good school

districts are higher priced and are likely to appreciate more compared to homes in the not- so-good school
districts, it has implications for housing affordability, access to “free” public education, and households’ ability to
accumulate wealth through investment in their house. Finally, by bidding for houses, homeowners reveal the
value they put on public goods and services that accompany their houses; public schools being one of them.
Accurate estimation of this value should help state and local governments and school districts in allocating
resources more efficiently, devising ways to fund K-12 education, and advocating for additional resources.
Key data sources
Alameda County, CA assessors’ data; school quality and demographics data from various school districts; US
Census
References
 Bayer, P., F. Ferreira. and R. McMillan. 2007. A Unified Framework for Measuring Preferences for
Schools and neighborhood. Journal of Political Economy 115(4): 588–638.
 Fiva, J. and L. Kirkeboen. 2008. Does the housing market react to new information on school quality?
CESIFOWorking Paper No. 2299.
 Hu, Y. and J. Yinger. 2008. The impact of school district consolidation on housing prices. National Tax
Journal 61(4): 609–633.
 Nguyen-Hoang, P. and J. Yinger. 2011. The capitalization of school quality into house values: A review.
Journal of Housing Economics 20(1): 30–48.
 Ries, J. and T. Somerville. 2010. School quality and residential values: evidence from Vancouver zoning.
Review of Economics and Statistics 92(4): 928–944.

Abstract Index #: 332
PLANNING FOR HOUSING IN CALIFORNIA: EXAMINING THE LOCATION OF SUITABLE SITES IN comminuty
Abstract System ID#: 1218
Individual Paper
BASOLO, Victoria [University of California, Irvine] basolo@uci.edu
Planning mandates by state governments to localities are intended to accomplish broader social goals.
Researchers, however, do not agree on the value of these mandates in practice (Bunnell and Jepson, 2011). In
the domain of housing planning, studies on the results of state mandates are relatively scarce; however, there
are some important findings. In one study, for example, mandates for local housing plans resulted in resentment
with city doing just enough to meet legal requirements (Hoch, 2007), while another study shows statemandated housing plans are associated with city supportive of affordable housing spending more of their own
source revenue on housing program (Basolo, 1999).
California law requires localities to plan for housing needs at all income levels. A land inventory has been part of
the housing plan historically, but changes to planning law in 2004 introduced more rigorous expectations for this
inventory. California jurisdictions were required to identify land suitable for residential development at the parcel
level. Moreover, parcel size must be reported for each site to assist in assessing potential housing affordability.
This research asks a set of questions concerning the location of the sites identified in local housing plans. These
questions include: 1) To what extent are these sites clustered within a region (county)? If clustered, what
neighborhood characteristics are associated with location of the suitable sites? Are the locations of larger parcels,
which tend to be more suitable for affordable housing, located in less desirable neighborhood than smaller
parcels? The research uses data compiled from local government housing plans in one southern California
county; plans included in the data set were deemed in compliance by the State of California for the planning
period 2006-2014. The site data was combined with secondary data sources including the American Community
Survey. Using this unique data set, an analysis will be performed in GIS to assess the extent of clustering of
suitable sites. This analysis will be followed by a logistic regression analysis to determine if neighborhood socio-

economic and other characteristics predict location of suitable sites. The last analysis will examine the
neighborhood context by parcel size using regression analysis.
The research is relevant to housing and planning scholarship and practice. Evaluation of plans is a vital and
growing focus for planning research, but is generally under theorized. Understanding planning and development
outcomes of mandates for local housing planning can contribute to theory development and to formulation of
effective state regulations for local housing planning.
References
 Basolo, V. 1999. The  impact of Intercity Competition and Intergovernmental Factors on Local Affordable
Housing Expenditures. Housing Policy Debate 10(3):659-688.
 Bunnell, G. and E.J. Jepson, Jr. 2011. The Effect of Mandated Planning on Plan Quality. Journal of the
American Planning Association 77(4):338-353.
 Hoch, C. 2007. How Plan Mandates Work: Affordable Housing in Illinois. Journal of the American
Planning Association 73(1):86-99.

Abstract Index #: 333
SECONDARY SUITES IN CANADA: AN UNDERGROUND REMEDY FOR AFFORDABILITY AND SOCIAL MOBILITY?
Abstract System ID#: 1220
Individual Paper
MORROW, Gregory [University of Calgary] gmorrow@ucalgary.ca
Canadian city are facing the triple challenge of rising housing costs, stagnant household incomes, and an
increasingly aging population. One solution that has been suggested to ameliorate these challenges is the
expansion of secondary suites (typically called accessory dwelling units in the U.S.). Secondary suites are
politically controversial, as homeowners fight to protect the “sanctity” of single-family neighborhood, fearing
the in-flux of more transient populations, rising density, parking and traffic congestion, and declining property
values. Responding to homeowner concerns, many city councils have outlawed them. But given the affordability
crisis, illegal secondary suites – often basement apartments – are rapidly expanding, creating an informal housing
market across Canada. For example, in Calgary (pop. 1.2 million), where the median house price is over $500,000,
there are an estimated 80,000 illegal secondary suites. With a dire need for affordable housing, city like Calgary
formally reject secondary suites while informally accepting them, only enforcing flagrant code violations when
specifically reported. The informal nature of much of the secondary suite market has complicated our
understanding of them. For example, where exactly are they located and do they have form a distinct spatial
pattern? What form do they take – basement, detached, side-by-side, etc? Who is living in them and are these
disproportionately immigrants and/or migrants? Are they actually providing affordable housing? This paper
presents evidence from phase one of a multi-year research project -- the first pan-Canadian study of secondary
suites -- to begin to shed light on some of these critical questions. The data represents the findings from a survey
of planning departments from the fifty Canadian city with a population (2011 Census) of 100,000 or more. The
survey findings suggest that secondary suites form part of a shadow society, demonstrating their intersection
with questions of race, gender, migration, and citizenship. These findings are important to help re-shape policy
with respect to secondary suites/accessory dwelling units.
References
 Antoninetti, Maurizio. (2008). “The Difficult History of Ancillary Units: The Obstacles and Potential
Opportunities to Increase the Heterogeneity of neighborhood and the Flexibility of Households in the
United States,” Journal of Housing for the Elderly 22 (4), 348-375.
 Chapman, NJ and DA Howe. (2001). “Accessory Apartments: Are They a Realistic Alternative for Ageing
in Place?,” Housing Studies 16 (5), 637-650.
 Liebig, PS, T Koenig, and J Pynoos. (2006). “Zoning, accessory dwelling units, and family caregiving:
issues, trends, and recommendations,” Journal of Aging and Social Policy 18 (3-4), 155-172.




Wegmann, Jake and Karen Chapple. (2014). “Hidden density in single-family neighborhood: backyard
cottages as an equitable smart growth strategy,” Journal of Urbanism 7 (3), 307-329.
Wegmann, Jake and Alison Nemirow. (2011). Secondary Units and Urban Infill: A Literature Review.
Berkeley, CA: Berkeley Institute of Urban and Regional Development.

Abstract Index #: 334
MAKING A WAY IN DETROIT WHEN INDIGNITY WON'T DO
Abstract System ID#: 1234
Individual Paper
LASKEY, Allison [University of California, Irvine] alaskey@uci.edu
This past year, running water was shut off to tens of thousands of homes in Detroit, Michigan. UN Special
Rapporteurs on human rights visited the iconic American city to hear testimony about the city’s inability to
deliver on the basics. In the most water-rich region of the country, mostly poor, African American residents
found themselves relying on community-organized deliveries of plastic water bottles to get them through each
day, half-liter by half-liter. The UN Rapporteurs found the situation full of “indignity” and “contrary to human
rights.”
In fact, for the Detroiters who testified before the UN Rapporteurs, the water shutoffs were only the newest
shortcoming of the city to uphold the dignity and human rights of certain segments of the Detroit population. As
the governor-appointed Emergency Financial Manager replaced their democratically elected city officials; whilst
police brutality prevents residents from calling 911 for help; with food deserts continuing to plague the city -- all
in all when the public sector is not satisfying basic promises to taxpayers and electorate, and when the private
sector does not offer jobs or basic goods, where does that leave Detroiters?
Specifically, I ask: What narratives do Detroit activists tell and hear in their daily organizational lives to explain
why they cannot turn to the government to ensure their basic livelihood and wellbeing? And how do these
narratives inform practices that activists and organizations engage in to address their problems?
The community development and public management literatures offer many avenues for the public sector to
incorporate and recognize resident voices, yet the disconnect between resident needs and the ability to provide
for these needs in Detroit remains vast. These literatures offer theoretical frameworks and practical tools for the
public sector to deepen community engagement (Cheadle et al, 2005), empower the public (Feldman &
Khademian 2003), and promote meaningful participation and inclusion (Feldman & Khademian 2000). Local
knowledge is increasingly seen as critical to effective, just, and resilient policymaking (Innes & Booher 2010).
Public managers are expected to create public value (Moore 1995) and to meet the shared interests of the public
(Denhardt & Denhardt 2000). Even in light of the undue challenges faced by shrinking city, scholars have called
attention to opportunities to create “more productive, sustainable, and ecologically sound… livable city”
(Hollander, et al 2009). These literatures, however, remain focused on the public sector’s initiative and do not
offer theoretical or practical tools for residents who are systematically disempowered, unincorporated, and left
without access in the public and private spheres. This study investigates the responses of activists and
organizations in such a dire situation. Beyond public value, beyond private efficiency, this study contributes
insight into the ways Detroiters articulate and mobilize to contest the disenfranchising designs of their city.
Through analysis of ethnographic fieldnotes, semi-structured interviews, and archival research, this study
analyzes narratives and practices of five Detroit activists based at three social justice organizations. I am
embedded in activities at these organizations and with these activists, where I observe and record narrative
accounts and daily practices in the course of ongoing organizational work activities, including community
interactions and high-profile events like the UN Rapporteur visit. Narratives and practices are both regular
elements of daily life that reveal underlying social meaning and action. Narrative meaning both produces and
explains human action (Polkinghorne 1988), while practices comprise daily actions that constitute social life
(Feldman & Orlikowski 2011). By discerning and analyzing narratives and practices of activists within

organizations, this study offers an empirical basis for expanding the community development and public
management literatures to address recognition and incorporation of citizen voices when the government and
private sector are not leading the way.
References
 Innes, J. E., & Booher, D. E. (2010). Planning with complexity: An introduction to collaborative rationality
for public policy. Routledge.
 Hollander, J. B., Pallagst, K., Schwarz, T., & Popper, F. J. (2009). Planning shrinking city. Progress in
Planning, 72(4), 223-232.
 Feldman, Martha S. and Anne M. Khademian 2003. Empowerment and cascading vitality. In Kim S.
Cameron, Jane E. Dutton, and Robert E. Quinn (eds.) Positive organizational scholarship. San Francisco:
Barrett- Koehler Publishers, 2003: 343-358.
 Feldman, M. S., & Orlikowski, W. J. (2011). Theorizing practice and practicing theory. Organization
Science, 22(5), 1240-1253.
 Polkinghorne, D. E. (1988). Narrative knowing and the human sciences. Suny Press.

Abstract Index #: 335
DOES CALIFORNIA AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROCESS WORK?
Abstract System ID#: 1238
Individual Paper
NIEMEIER, Deb [University of California, Davis] dniemeier@ucdavis.edu
In this research, we evaluate the effectiveness of the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) in addressing
affordable housing shortages in the Bay Area during the third housing element cycle, 1999-2006. Specifically, we
asked 1) how successfully did the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) concentrate affordable housing in
areas in need of improved jobs-housing balances; 2) how effective have city operating under California
affordable housing policy been in placing affordable housing near transit and other urban amenities, and 3) how
have city constrained affordable housing development in area with low job accessibility? We find that ABAG,
the authority tasked with distributing RHNA for the Bay Area, successfully distributed new affordable housing
units in jurisdictions with greater jobs-housing imbalances when compared to the distribution of market rate
production in the same period. However, if we specifically examine imbalances between low-wage jobs and
affordable housing, we find that the construction of affordable tended to concentrate in locales with
systematically less need relative to market rate production. Among the Bay Area’s three largest city, we find
that San Francisco and Oakland succeeded in placing affordable housing in neighborhood with greater need for
improved jobs-housing ratios, but San Jose did not. Only San Francisco succeeded in concentrating affordable
housing near transit.

Abstract Index #: 336
NEIGHBORHOOD TRAJECTORIES OF LOW-INCOME U.S HOUSEHOLDS: AN APPLICATION OF SEQUENCE ANALYSIS
Abstract System ID#: 1263
Individual Paper
LEE, Kwan Ok [National University of Singapore] gemesque@gmail.com, presenting author, primary author
GALSTER, George [Wayne State University] george.galster@wayne.edu
SMITH, Richard [Wayne State University] smithrichardj@wayne.edu
Neighborhood conditions experienced over time by low-income households is a topic of increasing interest and
public policy importance. We employ sequence analysis of six neighborhood indicators to identify common
patterns among the 20-year longitudinal residential trajectories of 865 low-income households in the U.S. who
formed households during 1988-1992, as represented in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. We first present
descriptive analysis results of residential trajectories of these low-income households in general. Then we aim to

discover using quasi-experimental approach (i.e. propensity matching) whether a spell of residence in subsidized
housing produces a different (and inferior) subsequent sequence of neighborhood environments in which lowincome households live compared to never having resided in subsidized housing. Our most striking finding from
the descriptive sequence analysis is that low-income families that begin as households in disadvantaged
neighborhoods rarely exit from them over the ensuing two decades, whereas low-income families that begin in
better-off neighborhood tend to transition into successively more deprived ones over time. This pattern is
replicated over most neighborhood indicators analyzed, though it often varies by race and gender. Femaleheaded, nonwhite households of low income experience the most prolonged exposures to disadvantaged
neighborhoods, providing evidence about the potential role of space in perpetuating socioeconomic and racial
inequalities. Propensity score matching is currently being conducted and results will be available for the
presentation in October.
References
 Sampson, R. (2012) Great American City: Chicago and the Enduring Neighborhood Effect. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
 Clark, W.A V., Deurloo, M. and Dieleman, F. (2003) “Housing careers in the United States, 1968–93:
Modelling the sequencing of housing states.” Urban Studies, 40(1), pp. 143–160.
 van Ham, M., Hedman, L., Manley, D., Coulter, R. and Östh, J. (2013) “Intergenerational transmission of
neighbourhood poverty: an analysis of neighbourhood histories of individuals.” Transactions of the
British Association of Geographers, doi: 10.1111/tran.12040
 Coulter, R. and van Ham, M. (2013) “Following people through time: an analysis of individual residential
mobility biographies.” Housing Studies, 28:7, pp. 1037-1055.
 Galster, G. (2012) “The mechanism(s) of neighborhood effects: Theory, evidence, and policy
Implications.” In Van Ham, M., Manley, D., Bailey, N., Simpson L., and Maclennan, D., Eds.,
Neighbourhood Effects Research: New Perspectives. Dordrecht, NL: Springer: pp. 23-56.

Abstract Index #: 337
RECLAIMING URBAN DESIGN AS PUBLIC ENTERPRISE: THE VANCE AVENUE COLLABORATIVE AND URBAN
TRANSFORMATIONS IN MEMPHIS (TN, USA)
Abstract System ID#: 1273
Individual Paper
RACITI, Antonio [University of Memphis] araciti@memphis.edu
In US, for more than two decades, local officials have used HOPE VI funds provided by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) to relocate tenants from and demolish aging public housing complex.
Using Section 8 Vouchers, local and federal housing officials sought to enable former public housing tenants to
improve their quality of life by moving to so-called “neighborhoods of opportunity”. Research by several social
scientists (Fraser et alii 2009, Goetz and Chapple 2010, Goetz 2011) have documented by of the serious costs and
unintended consequences of this program.
Shortly after his appointment as HUD Secretary, Shaun Donovan, announced the launch of a new program to
replace HOPE VI called Choice neighborhood. This program sought to transform conditions within public housing
neighborhoods in a manner that honored local stakeholders’ wishes while minimizing resident displacement. In
2010, the City of Memphis (TN, USA) requested $250,000 to formulate a redevelopment plan for the Vance
Avenue (VA) Neighborhood – its last remaining public housing complex. In doing so, the City invited the Vance
Avenue Collaborative (VAC), a coalition representing more than two-dozen community-based organizations and a
team of University of Memphis researchers to partner with them in preparing a visionary development plan for
the VA neighborhood.
Using a mixed-methods approach carried out within a participatory action research framework, this paper
describes how University and community partners tried to reorient the process of urban development through an
independent community planning effort. In particular, it shows how the partnership used the process of building

an urban design proposal to generate a broad-based public debate regarding urban regeneration, residential
segregation, public housing, and economic development in Memphis.
References
 Fraser J. C., Ashley B. B., Bazuin J. T., Oakley Deirdre Á. (2013), HOPE VI, Colonization, and the Production
of Difference, Urban Affairs Review, N. 49, 525.
 Goetz E. G. 2011, Gentrification in Black and White: The Racial Impact of Public Housing Demolition in
American city, Urban Studies, Vol. 48, N. 8, pp. 1581-1604.
 Goetz E. G. and Chapple K. 2010, You Gotta Move: Advancing the debate on the Record of Dispersal,
Housing Policy Debate, Vol. 20, N. 2, pp. 209-236.

Abstract Index #: 338
WHOSE URBANISM? FROM GUERILLA URBANISM TO LEAN URBANISM FOR SHRINKING city
Abstract System ID#: 1318
Individual Paper
AUDIRAC, Ivonne [University of Texas at Arlington] audirac@uta.edu
American policy discourses of shrinking city regeneration are “glocally” framed and focused on finding the city’s
unique position in the region and the global economy (Audirac forthcoming). In this “glocal” context heavily
dominated by gentrifying forces, a struggle between elite (exchange-value-based) and grass-root (use-value
based) urbanisms has ensued. A number of alternative urbanisms, subaltern localisms, and transnational third
spaces (Hou 2010) have emerged as forms of resistance to spatial stigma (Wacquant et al 2014), blind dismissal in
dominant planning discourses (Diaz 2012) and socio spatial exclusion. Until recently, and in the wake of the great
recession, grass-roots urbanisms have gone relatively unnoticed particularly by planning pundits offering
declining, deindustrialized city their own brand of urbanism and expertise for rekindling growth. A common
tenet among elite approaches in the U.S. is an outright rejection of distributive policy and/or a search for
alternatives to increasing the exchange value of vacant land. Typically they reframe the problems of community
development in shrinking city as fundamentally related to:
•
•

A dearth of entrepreneurial skills (Porter 2011) and of creatives (Florida 2002)
Stifling land-use zoning (Duany 2013) and lack of compact development (Nelson el al. 2014).

This paper reviews the aforementioned grass-root and elite urbanisms, draws conclusions and implications for
established city planning tenets and ultimately for city planning education.
References
 Wacquant, L., Slater, T., & Pereira, V. B. (2014). Territorial stigmatization in action. Environment and
Planning A, 46(6), 1270 –
 Hou, J. (Ed.). (2010). Insurgent Public Space: Guerrilla Urbanism and the Remaking of Contemporary
Cities (1 edition). New York: Routledge.
 Diaz, D. R., & Torres, R. D. (Eds.). (2012). Latino Urbanism: The Politics of Planning, Policy and
Redevelopment. New York: NYU Press.
 Duany, A. (2014, January 30). The Pink Zone: Why Detroit is the New Brooklyn. Fortune. Retrieved from
http://fortune.com/2014/01/30/the-pink-zone-why-detroit-is-the-new-brooklyn/
 Audirac, I. (forthcoming) The American experience with urban shrinkage. In Martinez-Fernandez, C., T.
Wayman, S. Fol, .and I. Audirac (editors) Shrinking city in Australia, Japan, Europe and the USA: from a
global process to local policy responses, Progress in Planning.

Abstract Index #: 339
URBAN RENEWAL, RESIDENTIAL MOBILITY AND LOCATION CHOICE AS THE PRODUCT OF HOUSING
DISPLACEMENT: AN EX-ANTE ANALYSIS
Abstract System ID#: 1330
Poster
LOPEZ, Esteban [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] lopezoch@illinois.edu, presenting author, primary
author
GREENLEE, Andrew [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] agreen4@illinois.edu
Urban renewal has been highly questioned because of its unintended effects on the displacement of residents to
housing situations where residents are worse off in terms of their housing adequacy, affordability, access to the
labor market, among many other unexplored effects. This paper focuses on characterizing residential mobility in
Champaign-Urbana in the context of the current process of urban renewal the Bristol Park neighborhood. In a
first stage we explore what are the main variables predicting higher propensities of residency changes,
controlling for available covariates. The initial results show that Bristol Park has a lower average probability of
residence changes compared to those neighborhood with traditionally more rotating residents. This suggests
that Bristol Park is a more stable neighborhood compared to others, and its residents could face higher costs of
moving which might not be considered in current compensation plans.

Abstract Index #: 340
CHALLENGES OF MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENTS: AN ANALYSIS OF CURRENT MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENTS IN U.S.A
Abstract System ID#: 1336
Individual Paper
ANJOMANI, Ardeshir [University of Texas at Arlington] anjomani@uta.edu, presenting author, primary author
TESSO, Gizachew [ITT Technical Institute] gizachew.tesso@gmail.com
Euclidian zoning and segregated  land_use planning practices have been challenged to address certain urban issues
resulting in many critiques emerging against various core values of planning practices and planning paradigm.
There are numerous urban problems that could not be addressed in single use development. Mixed use
development as a new theory claims to have the solutions to the urban issues associated with single use
development. However, mixed used developments have been criticized for also failing to address their purported
claims.
This research focuses on analyzing and evaluating the tenets of mixed-use development to determine whether
claims of accommodating mixed-income residents, increased density, improved racial diversity, provision of
affordable housing, and improved employment trends are achieved. In doing so, 632 single use Block Groups and
84 mixed-use development Block Groups that are located in majority of larger metropolitan area of the US city
examined. The study employed a number of different techniques of spatial and data analysis including GIS,
descriptive and other statistical analysis, and regression analysis. The results were mixed. Density changes were
not found to be different between single use and mixed use area and the minority population reduced in the
mixed-use block groups. On the other hand, affordability, employment and mixed-income issues were better
accommodated in mixed use area than in single use area.
The results also showed an increase in rent within mixed-use development that has coupled with an increase in
minority population in the single use development which increased by 0.58% over the same period. This could be
related to outmigration of minority population from the mixed-use developments. This is contrary to the ideals of
mixed-use development since mixed use development are intended to provide a residential facilities for diverse
income group and a racially diverse population. Therefore, more attention and accommodation for moderate
increase in housing rent is needed.

References
 Darcy, (2010). De-concentration of Disadvantage and Mixed-income Housing: a Critical Discourse
Approach. Housing, Theory and Society, Vol. 27, No. 1, 1–22.
 Fraser and Kick (2007). The Role of Public, Private, Non-profit and Community Sectors in Shaping Mixedincome Housing Outcomes in the US. Urban Studies, Vol. 44, No. 12, 2357–2377.
 Galster, Anderson, and Musterd, (2010). Who is Affected by Neighborhood Income Mix? Gender, Age,
Family, Employment, and Income Differences. Urban Studies.
 Goetz (2010) Desegregation in 3D: Displacement, Dispersal, and Development in American Public
Housing. Housing Studies, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp. 137-158.
 Graves, (2011). Mixed Outcome Developments: Comparing Policy Goals to Resident Outcomes in MixedIncome Housing. Journal of the American Planning Association, vol. 77, No. 2.

Abstract Index #: 341
AN ANALYSIS OF JUSTICE OR ACCESS TO JUSTICE FOR BORROWERS RESULTING FROM LEGISLATIVE CHANGES IN
THE RESIDENTIAL MORTGAGE FINANCE SYSTEM
Abstract System ID#: 1354
Poster
KINEBREW, Corrine [Jackson State University] ckinebrew@gmail.com
In 2007 and 2008 disruptions in the residential mortgage markets reached an apex and sent shock waves across
the US economy as well as global markets. Former Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke in an address to the
London School of Economics is quoted as said, “The proximate cause of the (economic) crisis was the turn of the
housing cycle in the United States and the associated rise in delinquencies on subprime mortgages” (Kling 2009),.
This assessment is supported by numerous research studies designed to examine the causes of the downturn in
the economy and the cause of the foreclosure crisis itself.. (Foote, Gerardi, Goette, Willen 2009)
This study will adopt an end user centric approach to justice by making justice or access to justice for the
residential mortgage borrowers the unit of analysis. The Department of Justice in their Access to Justice Initiative
defines access to justice (ATJ) in conceptual working terms as being able to efficiently deliver outcomes that are
fair and accessible to all irrespective of wealth and status. This definition was adapted by the Foreclosure
Mediation Workshop (2011), and is appropriate for use in this study. By selecting justice or access to justice for
borrowers as the unit of analysis the measurement methodology will focus on the impact of the reform in the
Residential Mortgage Finance System (RMFS) on borrowers.
The RMFS is backed implicitly or explicitly by government guarantees. As such homeownership is supported by all
taxpayers and is considered a social good. This dictates that there should be a level of fairness, without elements
of discrimination, in the (RMFS) for those who have the resources and choose to participate. Government has
the responsibility and the legislative ability to provide oversight and stop abuses in order to protect consumers.
This presentation is extracted for a broader work by the author that analysis of the quality of the legislation,
policies and program that have been developed as remedies to address the irregularities in the RMFS for
residential borrowers. However, this presentation will only examine the quality of the enabling legislation
through the use of a conventional content analysis and policy mapping (Sifer, Sulek, & Mayer 2011). There are
three question addressed in this presentation:
1.
2.
3.

Are the remedies just (fair and effective)?
Are the remedies corrective?
Are the remedies reformative?

“The Dodd Frank Act” is the primary corrective legislation. The Content analysis provides an interpretation of the
content of the text of the enabling legislation. This insight into the initial legislation should reveal if there is an

underlying justice criteria embedded in the legislative intent. The justice criteria and indicators are adapted for
principles in justice theory and related studies (Gramatikov, Barendrecht, Laxminarayan &etl 2009).
The content analysis will focus on the text from two sections of the Dodd Frank Act. They are the Qualified
Mortgage and the proposed Standard Mortgage Servicer Agreement since these sections have the most direct
impact on borrowers. Given the complex nature of the legislation and the required interaction between sectors,
a policy map will provide a visual representation that can be used as a tool to capture critical elements of the
legislation at it relates to borrowers. This can be used to inform practice especially in the planning community.
References
 Foote, C. , Gerardi, K., Goette,L. and Willen, P. Reducing Forclosure Public Policy Discussion Paper No.092 April 2009 Federal Reserve Bank of Boston www. bost.frg.orb/economic ppdp/2009/ppdp0902.htm
 Gramatikov, M Barendrecht, M Laxminarayan M. & et “ A Handbook for Measuring the Coast and
Quality of Access to Justice “ Maklu & Tilburg Institute for Interdisciplinary Studies of Civil Law and
Conflict Resolution system 2009 www.maklu.eu
 Kling, A. “The Root of the Financial Crisis” Policy Review December 2009 & January 2010 Hoover
Institute, 21-33
 Sifer, K Sulek, D & Mayer M. (2011) “Using Policy Mapping and Analysis to Understand Complex Policy
Environments and Improve Decision Making”
http://www.boozallen.com/media/file/Policy_Mapping.pdf

Abstract Index #: 342
OPPORTUNITY, TRANSPORTATION AND NEIGHBORHOOD CHOICE: A QUANTITATIVE EXAMINATION OF
LOCATION CHOICES IN MTO
Abstract System ID#: 1357
Individual Paper
KNAAP, Eli [University of Maryland at College Park] eknaap@umd.edu
In this paper we apply a discrete choice model to study location preferences of participants in the Baltimore
portion of the Moving to Opportunity (MTO) federal housing program. In the 1990s and 2000s, the MTO
program provided housing vouchers to families living in federally assisted public housing. Although a great deal of
research has examined how neighborhood characteristics impacted outcomes of MTO participants,
comparatively little research has examined how families selected their neighborhood.
We exploit precise location information across several datasets from the state of Maryland to develop a rich set
of location alternatives. MTO households are spatially identified with a particular housing unit and neighborhood
composition. Using a discrete choice model, we describe how these characteristics impacted the location
decisions of program participants
We describe how neighborhood and household choices differ by treatment group as well as by automobile
access.
References
 Rosenblatt, Peter, and Stefanie DeLuca. "“We Don't Live Outside, We Live in Here”: Neighborhood and
Residential Mobility Decisions Among Low‐Income Families†." City & Community 11.3 (2012): 254-284.
 Pendall, Rolf. "Driving to opportunity: Understanding the links among transportation access, residential
outcomes, and economic opportunity for housing voucher recipients." (2014).
 Jennifer Darrah, Stefanie DeLuca, “Living Here has Changed My Whole Perspective”: How Escaping
Inner-City Poverty Shapes Neighborhood and Housing Choice, Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management, 2014, 33, 2

Track 6: International Development Planning
Abstract Index #: 343
SURVIVORS OR VICTIMS: A VIEW OF RESILIENCE FROM THE SLUM DWELLERS PERSPECTIVE.
Abstract System ID#: 49
Individual Paper
ANDAVARAPU, Deepika [University of Cincinnati] andavad@mail.uc.edu, presenting author, primary author
MAHYAR, Arefi [University of Cincinnati] mahyararefi@gmail.com
Theorizing informal settlements as resilient urban system has prompted this research. Based on an ethnographic
research in the Pedda Jalaripeta (PJ) Slum of Visakhapatnam, India, we propose that resilience in the context of
urban slums is multi-dimensional. The PJ slum is resilient in that it has maintained its cultural identity as a fishing
village over a 40-year period (temporal); it continues to provide affordable, quality housing to its residents
(spatial); and the community maintains direct linkages to those with power and access to legal knowledge
(political).
The goal of this research is to expand on the conceptual understanding of resilience in slums. An ethnographic
approach was used to study the PJ slum in Visakhapatnam. From March through June 2014, 44 residents of the
community were interviewed and 3 focus groups were organized one each with older fishermen; younger
fishermen; and the women in the community. The perspectives of local leaders were canvassed through multiple
key informant interviews. Employees in various government agencies such as the fisheries development office,
the planning, engineering, and welfare departments were also interviewed.
Like most urban slums, the PJ slum witnessed a myriad of natural disasters over the past four decades, a fire
destroyed two-thirds of the slum in 1984 and the community was rebuilt after the disaster. In 2004 the Indian
Ocean tsunami wrecked havoc on the slum, the community has recovered since then. More recently, the
community has witnessed an avalanche of tourism-oriented development within the Coastal Protection Zone that
threatens the coastal eco system and the community’s livelihood (fishing). The PJ community not only survived
these natural and man-made hazards but it has moved to a better economic, physical, and social standing over
the past four decades.
Our findings indicate that a longitudinal temporal view of the PJ slum provides a comprehensive understanding of
resilience and offers an accurate assessment of structures and dynamics that affect the community. Spatially, the
PJ community tapped into multiple resources to expand both formally (through government program and loans)
and informally (without proper documentation). Politically, the community has developed direct links with
politicians, NGOs and government agencies, these linkages have provided the community with resources to cope
and adapt to disasters. These direct linkages or connections with those of power also provide the community
with legal basis, justifications, resources and opportunities to transform in to an enhanced social and physical
state.
The multi-dimensional resilience of the PJ community (Temporal, Spatial and Political) presented here challenges
the view of slum dwellers as passive disaster victims and focuses on their ingenuity and adaptability to overcome
external circumstances. Recent empirical evidence has shown that these comminuty can cope and adapt to
disasters and that they possess high reserves of social and political capital (Andavarapu & Arefi, 2015; Jabeen,
Johnson, & Allen, 2010; Keck & Etzold, 2013). Here we present resilience as a lens to identify the capacity of
residents to organize and confront their own vulnerability. This conception of resilience will allow for policy
aimed at improving the quality of life of the residents without dismantling the entire urban eco system (slums).
References
 Andavarapu, D., & Arefi, M. forthcoming (2015). Resilient Slums: Role of Social Capital. Tekton





Jabeen, H., Johnson, C., & Allen, A. (2010). Built-in resilience: learning from grassroots coping strategies
for climate variability. Environment and Urbanization, 22(2), 415–431. doi:10.1177/0956247810379937
http://www.actionaid.org/sites/files/actionaid/critical_stories_of_change_i.pdf
Keck, M., & Sakdapolrak, P. (2013). What is social resilience? Lessons learned and ways forward.
Erdkunde, 67(1), 5–19. doi:10.3112/erdkunde.2013.01.02the Urban Divide. Earthscan/James & James.

Abstract Index #: 344
THE RETURN OF REGIONAL PLANNING IN BRAZIL
Abstract System ID#: 79
Individual Paper
SHAKE, Joshua [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] jdshake@umich.edu
With the recent passage of the Estatuto da Metropole (Metropolis Statute) in January 2015, Brazilian State
governments are once again able to address urban_planning issues at the regional scale. This follows in the trend
of increasing urban_planning powers through national government enabling legislation that began with the
passage of the Estatuto da Cidade (City Statute) in 2001. While many of Brazil’s pressing urban problems may be
better addressed through region-wide thinking, inconsistencies between these two statutes and previous efforts
at regional planning in two Brazilian city point to some of the difficulties in future regional planning efforts.
Building upon research previously conducted on regional planning theory and efforts in Brazil, this paper
examines the processes and outcomes of regional planning efforts in the Brazilian metro regions of São Paulo and
Belo Horizonte. Research on this topic is important in that (1) power and capacity structures have shifted
between state and local governments in Brazil in recent years, with a greater concentration of planning abilities
at the local level; and this new regional planning statute reverses this trend. In doing so, (2) the layering of
planning instruments between different governments raises many issues of capacity and cooperation that have
not been fully explored in the Brazilian context.
Authors, such as Katz (2000), have noted a resurgence in regional planning in North American and European
contexts and point out that “devolution in governance” changes the ways in which planning issues are addressed.
Likewise, Wheeler (2002) has observed the growth in interest in the “New Regionalism” and suggests that it will
occur “not through top-down regional government, but through incremental development…between existing
levels of government” (267). In Brazil, metropolitan regional governance was mandated during the military
dictatorship (1964-1985) and housed at the state level. Souza (2005), however, argues that its demise occurred
as a result of its negative associations with the authoritarianism and centralization of military rule. As a result of
this and other economic and political restructurings at the end of the dictatorship, Brazilian urban_planning was
left highly fragmented until the creation of the City Statute (Melo, 1995). As Caldeira and Holston (2014) point
out in the case of São Paulo planning, the recent institutionalization of innovative reforms around participation
and social justice in that Statute has not been enough to ensure their fulfillment at the local level due to
complicated party politics. Therefore, this research asks: How can previous attempts at regional planning in
Brazil inform future efforts under the new legislation?
This paper expands and complicates the previous research on regional planning conducted in different urban
contexts. In Brazil, this new statute ostensibly represents state retrenchment through the reconcentration of
power in state governments and is therefore markedly different from the “New Regionalism” discussed by
Wheeler. Moreover, as the case in São Paulo demonstrates, recent state government attempts have failed due
to a lack of understanding of local level planning and regulations. And in Belo Horizonte, one of the most
effective articulators of regional planning initiatives has been a coalition of real estate developers. Therefore,
Melo’s distinction between clientistic and “old” power structures becomes blurred in this new governance
context. For planners, care must be taken to ensure the great strides in participatory democracy and planning
that have occurred in Brazil—and placed it as an international example of such efforts—are effectively
incorporated in these new regional planning bodies. Additionally, planners should take note of the requirement

that municipal plans be drafted in accordance with the regional plans, as this opens up the opportunity for new
forms of political maneuvering and dissent between various political parties.
References
 Caldeira T. and Holston, J. (2014). Participatory urban_planning in Brazil. Urban Stud published online 5
March 2014.
 Katz, B, ed. (2000). Reflections on Regionalism. Washington, DC: Brookings.
 Melo, M. C. (1995). State Retreat, Governance and Metropolitan Restructuring in Brazil. International
Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 19(3), 342-357.
 Souza, C. (2005). Brazilian metropolitan regions: regime change and governance vacuum. Public
administration and development, 25(4), 341-350.
 Wheeler, S. (2002). The new regionalism: Key characteristics of an emerging movement. Journal of the
American Planning Association 68, (3): 267.

Abstract Index #: 345
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY TAX AND EQUITY IN CIUDAD JUAREZ, MEXICO: ARE THERE REGRESSIVE EFFECTS?
Abstract System ID#: 82
Individual Paper
PENA, Sergio [El Colegio de la Frontera Norte] spena@colef.mx
Local municipalities in Mexico either lack the technical capacity or willingness to improve their revenue collection
capacity; this is due to the fact that it is easier to wait for revenue transfers from the federal government rather
than risk a political backlash. In recent years the federal government in Mexico is attempting to pass legislation
to be able to undertake the mandate of collecting property tax revenue, which normally belongs to local
municipalities. In general terms the policy has the goal of collecting revenue. However, it overlooks equity
aspects. Thus, the paper’s objective is to analyze equity in the property tax structure. The hypothesis being tested
is the existence of a regressive property tax structure. The hypothesis is tested using the case of Ciudad Juarez,
Mexico, a city located along the U.S.-Mexico border across the Rio Grande from El Paso, Texas.
There are two concepts related to equity--horizontal and vertical equity. In regards to property tax, horizontal
equity refers to the concept that those properties of the same value should be taxed at the same tax rate.
Vertical equity refers to the fact that properties of higher value should pay a higher tax rate; considering a
progressive tax structure as equitable. For the purpose of this paper the focus will be on vertical equity.
In order to operationalize the hypothesis, I employ data from the cadastral office (assessed value) and market
value data collected through different sources such as the home sales section in the local newspaper, web sites of
real estate companies and banks. Then, the data is subject to analysis testing for vertical equity employing
different regression model techniques as described in Paglin and Fogarty (1972), Cheng (1974), Sirmans et al
(1995), Kochin and Parks (1982). The different authors focus on the intercept and the slope parameters to test
the hypothesis of a regressive property tax structure. All those models use assessed value and market value. My
contribution to the topic is that in the paper I also developed a model that estimates the amount of tax based on
the formula employed by the municipality and regresses it on the assessed value square to determine if the tax
rate increases at an increasing rate—thus lacking a regressive effect.
The results in the different models strongly support the hypothesis that indeed the current tax structure in the
city presents evidence of a regressive nature. From a policy perspective this finding is important because this
contributes to the inequities that exist in Mexican society. A progressive property tax structure is a necessary
condition to achieve a more equitable city in Mexico.
References
 Paglin, Morton y Fogarty, Michel. (1972), “Equity and the Property Tax: A New Conceptual Performance
Focus”. National Tax Journal 25 (4), Rice University, Economics Department, Houston, Texas, pp. 557-65.







Cheng, Pao Lun (1974), “Property Taxation, Assessment Performance, and its Measurement”, Public
Finance 29 (3), Foundation Journal Public Finance, The Hague, Netherlands, pp. 268-84.
Sirmans, Stacy, Diskin, Barry and Friday, Swint (1995), “Vertical Inequity in the Taxation of Real
Property”, National Tax Journal 48 (1), Rice University, Economics Department, Houston, Texas pp. 7184.
Kochin, Levis y Parks Richard (1982), “Vertical Equity in Real Estate Assessment: A Fair Appraisal”.
Economic Inquiry 20 (4), Wesley W. Wilson, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon, pp. 511-531.
Perló-Cohen, Manuel y Zamorano-Ruiz, Luis (1999), “Reform of the Real Estate Tax System in Mexicali:
1989-1998”. Working Paper, Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.

Abstract Index #: 346
TRANSPORTATION ASSESSMENTS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES: IMPACT EVALUATION OF SOCIO-ECONOMIC
IMPACTS OF THE MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORPORATION (MCC) ROAD IMPROVEMENTS IN THE REPUBLIC OF
GEORGIA USING A QUASI-EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
Abstract System ID#: 86
Individual Paper
FELKNER, John [Florida State University] jfelkner@fsu.edu
Given the economic importance of road network improvements for economic development in developing
countries in the face of rapid urbanization in the 21st Century, it is not surprising that often the majority of
foreign aid provided is for road related projects: for example, the African Development Bank invests almost 80%
of its portfolio in infrastructure. At the same time, maintaining public support for development aid given
continued uncertainty about the effects of development projects and a climate of increasing development
budget cuts has resulted in a global emphasis on results-based evaluation system (Hansen et al 2011). Resultsbased evaluation approaches offer the potential for governments and planners to quantitatively measure the
impacts of infrastructure or other planning improvements on a range of socio-economic indicators, including
household welfare, health and education outcomes, and such methods are increasingly being used for
transportation and even municipal planning (Khalifa 2012) in developing countries.
Consequently, focus on results-based evaluation system for road infrastructure to provide tangible evidence that
the designed infrastructure has met and is meeting the objectives originally set for it, such as poverty reduction,
is unprecedented. Rigorous results-based evaluations of program including infrastructure improvements offer
the potential to identify which types of interventions work, which projects have succeeded in their goals, and
lessons learned which in turn can inform improved government and donor spending (Smith et al 2013). This is
particularly true for informing decisions on road improvements as they are traditionally (and in most cases today)
made using cost-benefit measures usually focusing on Vehicle Operating Cost (VOC) savings (Van de Walle 2009).
Yet despite this consensus, there is little reliable empirical evidence on both the types and magnitudes of the
socio-economic benefits of road improvements (Smith et al 2013). Experimental or quasi-experimental
evaluation approaches have been identified as crucial for road projects because of their rigor and their robust
ability to address issues such as the endogeneity of road placements, their ability to better identify and match
comparison or control groups in treatment/control approaches, and their ability to control for fixed timeinvariant factors or common trends affecting both treatment and control groups (Hansen et al 2011; Smith et al
2013; Nkonya et al 2014).
In this paper, we conduct an evaluation of the socio-economic  impact of The Millennium Challenge Corporation
(MCC) US$ 200 million improvement of 220 km of highway in the Republic of Georgia, completed 2008-2010,
using a rigorous quasi-experimental design that includes an approach that estimates quantified variation in
project improvement benefits across geography and space. The improved highway provides significant trunk
connectivity in Georgia, as it connects the capitol, Tbilisi, to both Turkey and Armenia to the south, and travels
through one of the poorest and least accessible regions of Georgia. Three distinct evaluation methods are
implemented to allow for a robust comparison of estimated outcomes: (a) a difference-in-difference approach,
(b) a matched difference-in-difference using propensity scores, and (c) a “dose-response” continuous treatment

approach that estimated project  impact across geography, quantifying the variation in impact for individual
communities at individual locations. The evaluation is able to quantify  impact on a range of socio-economic
outcomes for poor rural households, including household welfare, employment, health, education, and
accessibility to social services (hospitals and schools) and urban markets.
The research contributes to the understanding and development of results-based evaluations for transportation
and planning projects in the developing world.
References
 Hansen, H., Andersen, O. W., & White, H. (2011). Impact evaluation of infrastructure interventions.
Journal of Development Effectiveness, 3(1), 1–8.
 Khalifa, M.A., 2012. A critical review on current practices of the monitoring and evaluation in the
preparation of strategic urban plans within the Egyptian context. Habitat International, 36(1), pp.57–67.
 Nkonya, E., Phillip, D., Mogues, T., Pender, J., & Kato, E. (2012).  impact of Community-driven
Development program on Income and Asset Acquisition in Africa: The Case of Nigeria. World
Development, 40(9), 1824–1838.
 Smith, L. C., Khan, F., Frankenberger, T. R., & Wadud, a. K. M. A. (2013). Admissible Evidence in the Court
of Development Evaluation? The Impact of CARE’s SHOUHARDO Project on Child Stunting in Bangladesh.
World Development, 41, 196–216.
 Van de Walle, D. (2009), Impact evaluation of rural road projects, Journal of Development Effectiveness,
1(1), 15-36.

Abstract Index #: 347
ORGANIZATIONS AND PARTICIPATORY DEVELOPMENT: POST-DISASTER RECOVERY IN HAITI
Abstract System ID#: 99
Individual Paper
CONTRERAS, Santina [University of California, Irvine] santina.l.contreras@uci.edu
Participatory approaches increasingly are being emphasized in post-disaster recovery projects in developing
countries. Many organizations engaged in this work promote the use of a participatory approach as if it were a
single solution, even though the ways in which they engage local comminuty often varies significantly. Research
focused on the variation in participatory approaches, especially for post-disaster recovery development efforts, is
scarce in the literature and, thus, we know little about the  impact of different approaches on post-disaster
recovery.
Studies of organizations show that variations in key characteristics can result in differences in programmatic
approaches, including levels of inclusion/participation. However, there is a scarcity of systematic research on the
work of organizations engaging in post-disaster recovery projects. Therefore, the central aim of this paper is to
better understand the use of participatory approaches by organizations in the international post-disaster setting.
Haiti, near the capital city of Port-au-Prince, was rocked by a magnitude 7.0 earthquake on January 12, 2010,
bringing death, destruction and chaos to an already poor and vulnerable community. A large influx of
organizations responded to this disaster shortly after the earthquake. Many of these organizations, as well as
more recent groups, continue to work on recovery projects in Haiti. For this reason, the country presents an
excellent case for assessing the work of a large number of post-disaster recovery initiatives working in the same
context.
This study uses a multi phased, mixed method approach, involving a unique database of aid organizations
compiled by the researcher. A multivariate analysis of organizations will be used to identify associations between
organizational characteristics and participatory approaches. The results of this research will enrich our knowledge
of participatory approaches used by organizations in developing countries and expand our understanding of the
recovery process in an effort to improve work undertaken in the international post-disaster setting.

References
 Arnstein, S. R. (1969). A Ladder Of Citizen Participation. Journal of the American Institute of Planners,
35(4), 216–224.
 Choguill, M. B. G. (1996). A Ladder of Community Participation for Underdeveloped Countries. Habitat
International, 20(3), 431–444.
 Sen, A. (1999). Development as Freedom. New York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf.

Abstract Index #: 348
RAPID URBANIZATION AND SPATIAL DEVELOPMENT PATTERNS IN THE MIDDLE EAST: A CASE FROM DOHA,
QATAR
Abstract System ID#: 104
Poster
HONG, ChangYu [Portland State University] 503changyu@gmail.com, presenting author
SHANDAS, Vivek [Portland State University] vshandas@pdx.edu, primary author
MAKIDO, Yasuyo [Portland State University] ymakido@pdx.edu
Urban area are now home to 50% of the world’s population and are projected to hold 70% by 2050 (UN, 2014).
By 2030, the United Nations (2014) projects that the proportion of people living in urban area will be over 60%
of the total global population, totaling 4.9 billion people. Roughly 95% of this massive urban growth will occur in
less developed countries (Brockerhoff, 2000) where rural area are either a greater percentage of the population
or where rapid economic growth is leading to the development and growth of city.
This research addressed the spatio-temporal coupling of urban growth in one urbanizing region of the Middle
East – Doha, Qatar. Using data from satellite imagery, we analyzed physical changes in the Doha metropolitan
region over time in order to provide a description of urban patterns that are specific to that study region. We
asked three research questions: 1) Does rapid urban development in the Middle East lead to increasing urban
sprawl; 2) In what way does rapid urban growth lead to unique patterns of development; and 3) To what extent
does urban sprawl interact with other forms of development to impact the density of urban development?
Answering these questions will provide some of the only descriptions of the physical growth patterns of Doha,
one of the most quickly developing city in the Middle East. Additionally, we aim to contribute to the urban
planning literature by understanding the extent to which physical and spatial urban growth interacts with
temporal scales of development.
Land cover changes are researched for elucidating urban sprawl in Asian city that have been experiencing rapid
development and urbanization (Cho, 2005; Li & Peijun, 2013; and Radhakrishinn et al., 2014). Urbanization
process takes on a mixed aspect of infill development and leapfrog urban sprawl. In addition, the urbanization
process causes excessive long-term urban expansion. The land cover change analysis provided a means of
spatially articulating six categories of urban growth. While the core area of the West Bay in Doha, the central
business district (CBD), and the hinterlands remain unchanged over the study period, all of the other area could
be placed into one of five development patterns.
Our approach to the study of Doha relied on satellite sensor imagery and a series of geo-statistical analyses. We
acquired 30-meter resolution satellite sensor imagery from the US Geological Survey’s Landsat TM, ETM+ and OLI
files from the years 1987, 1991, 1998, 2003, 2009, and 2013. We selected these images based on the following
criteria: 1) cloud cover of less than 5%, 2) summer season (from May to August, except 2003), and 3) the
availability of increments of four to seven years. The study area (31.2km x 37.8km), which encompassed the Doha
metropolitan region, was extracted from each scene of the satellite sensor imagery.
The results of our analysis revealed three key findings. First, the physical infrastructure of the Doha metropolitan
region has rapidly increased at a compound annual growth rate of 6.75% over the 26 years of our study period
(270 km2). Second, when comparing build-up urban area to population growth during the same time period (i.e.,
total urban area divided by total population), each individual in Doha began to have less overall space after 1998.
The amount of land per person actually increased from 36m2 in 1987 to 47m2 in 1991, but this was followed by a

downturn every year until 2013. Each individual in Doha now has 13m2 of land, and this is directly attributable to
the amount of urban development. Finally, while the physical growth of Doha is discernable through an analysis
of satellite images, the quality of growth and its implications for the social, economic, and environment
conditions of the region all require further study.
References
 Cho, J. (2005). urban_planning and Urban Sprawl in Korea. Urban Policy and Research, (2), 203-218.
 Brockerhoff, M. (2000). The urban demographic revolution. Population Today, (6), 1.
 Li, F. & Peijun, D. (2013) Dyanamic change analysis of urban sprawl based on remote sensing and GIS-a
case study of Jiangning, Nanjing, China. Proceedings of the JURSE, April 21-23.
 Radhakrishnan, N. (2014). Analysis of Urban Sprawl Pattern in Tiruchirappalli City Using Applications of
Remote Sensing and GIS. Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering, (7), 5555-5563.
 United Nations Statistics Division. (2014). UNSD Demographic Statistics. Retrieved from
http://data.un.org/Default.aspx

Abstract Index #: 349
POST-APARTHEID HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS AND SENSE OF COMMUNITY IN JOHANNESBURG
Abstract System ID#: 161
Poster
WILLIAMS, Jennifer [University of Michigan] jwillia@umich.edu
The right to housing is enshrined in the South African constitution, and despite the delivery millions of subsidized
houses, several challenges remain in order to more fully integrate low-income residents into the mainstream of
urban life. Although subsidized housing delivery in South Africa between 1994 and 2003 surpassed efforts in any
other countries, a significant housing shortage persists. Many new arrivals to housing developments in South
Africa come from squatter settlements, where they have developed social capital and networks of trust, support,
participation, and livelihoods. A great concern with slum clearance and relocation projects is that new lowincome housing developments disrupt the pre-existing sense of community, which is crucial for quality of life in
the slums. The large scale housing delivery and the housing backlog, coupled with the lack of attention to social
impacts of approaches to housing allocation, have far-reaching policy implications for the long-term viability of a
low-income housing market and residents’ well-being (Charlton, 2009).
The City of Johannesburg supports a vision for a “world class” image in an effort to move towards a more
equitable and inclusive society that provides a decent quality of life for all citizens, but the means to reach this
vision have often been through actions reminiscent of oppressive apartheid era planning (Huchzermeyer, 2011).
Housing advocates within the African National Congress (ANC) identified homeownership through the
Reconstruction and Development Programme (RDP) as a strategy to create access to decent housing for the poor
and black residents who were denied such rights under apartheid. The RDP and future policy have largely been
biased towards homeownership and asset creation for the poor (Charlton, 2009). Although the majority of RDP
houses are constructed in remote locations, where land is cheaper, housing environments that serve more of a
“dormitory” function, as opposed to a community, further estrange the urban poor from access to market
opportunities (Charlton, 2009; Lemanski, 2008).
I examine the sense of community among low-income residents in two post-apartheid housing sites in
Johannesburg – Cosmo City and Diepsloot – which have a large resident population residing in RDP housing.
Sense of community refers to an individual’s feeling of belonging to a group with a shared connection and
attachment to place. In particular, I pose the following question: How do low-income residents characterize the
sense of community in their current housing development? This question is important because it examines the
interdependence of housing and residents’ sense of community – an understudied issue in urban_planning
literature.

In order to answer this question, I take a mixed-method approach by analyzing household surveys, qualitative
interviews with residents and relevant stakeholder groups, and participatory mapping exercises. Although the
work is ongoing, I have conducted 120 household surveys, 36 resident interviews, and 6 participatory mapping
exercises in Cosmo City and Diepsloot. These data collection activities are based upon McMillan and Chavis’
(1986) four indicators for sense of community: social trust, community participation, neighborliness, and
emotional connection.
This research gives local residents the opportunity to voice their point of view. The preliminary findings indicate
that residents have limited community engagement and low levels of social trust within their townships. This
project’s emphasis on residents’ own voices may provide the impetus for developers and community
organizations to enact community building initiatives that more closely reflect residents’ needs and wants.
References
 Charlton, S. (2009). Housing for the nation, the city and the household: competing rationalities as a
constraint to reform? Development Southern Africa, 26(2), 301-315.
 Huchzermeyer, M. (2011). city with ‘slums’: From informal settlement eradication to a right to the city
in Africa. Claremont, South Africa: University of Cape Town (UCT) Press.
 Lemanski, C. (2008). Houses without community: Problems of community (in) capacity in Cape Town,
South Africa. Environment and Urbanization, 20, 393-410.
 McMillan, D.W., & Chavis, D.M. (1986). Sense of community: A definition and theory. Journal of
Community Psychology, 14, 6-23.

Abstract Index #: 350
HIGH-RISE HAPPINESS: HOUSING PREFERENCE AND LIFE SATISFACTION IN KOREA
Abstract System ID#: 165
Individual Paper
POTTER, James [Korea University in Seoul] cuz@cuzproduces.com, presenting author, primary author
RUDOLF, Robert [Korea University] rrudolf@korea.ac.kr
Though initially associated with modernity and modern living, high-rise housing has come to be associated with
poverty, crime, and unhealthy living conditions in the West. Meanwhile, in the rapidly developing economies of
East and Southeast Asia, where rapid urbanization drove city to adopt high-rise housing as a practical solution
to overcrowding, there are indications, however, that in Asian city, high-rise apartments have come to be
preferred to their low-rise counterparts. For instance, Yuen et al. (2006) have found that Singaporean residents
"have voiced high levels of satisfaction and their continued intention to remain in high-rise blocks". This paper
offers evidence that this is also the case in Korea. This paper uses a fixed-effects ordered logit estimator
(Baetschmann et al. 2011) in a subjective well being model to identify the effect of housing type, size, and tenure
on life satisfaction, controlling for a wide variety of personal circumstances and characteristics. Data is drawn
from the Korean Labor and Income Panel Study, which offers detailed, nationally representative longitudinal data
on roughly 5,000 urban households for the period 1998--2008. The analysis indicates that Koreans express
significantly higher levels of life satisfaction when they live in larger housing units, when they own rather than
rent their units, and when they live in apartments as opposed to other forms of housing, including independent
houses. Though these findings may not be surprising for those familiar with the Korean housing market, the
analysis provides rigorous evidence that high-rise living is the preferred form of housing in Korea. Though these
findings do not explain whether this preference is due to the status or amenities associated with high-rise living,
or some combination of the two, they do lend support to emerging research that firmly locates the drivers of
housing preference in socio-cultural context rather than characteristics inherent in the built environment (Park
and Ferrari, forthcoming).
References
 Baetschmann, G., Staub, K. E., & Winkelmann, R. (2011) Consistent estimation of the fixed effects
ordered logit model. The Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA), Bonn.






Costello, L. (2005) From prisons to penthouses: the changing images of high-rise living in Melbourne,
Housing Studies, 20(1):49–62.
Park, J. & Ferrari, E. (Forthcoming) High-Rise Housing ‘Gangnam Style’: the Cultural and Institutional
Determinants of the Urban Residential Built Forms.
Ronald, R. & Chiu, R. (2010) Changing housing policy landscapes in Asia pacific, International Journal of
Housing Policy, 10 (3):223-231.
Yuen, B.; Yeh, A.; Appold, S. J.; Earl, G.; Ting, J. & Kwee, L. K. (2006) High-rise Living in Singapore Public
Housing Urban Studies 43:583-600.

Abstract Index #: 351
ASSESSING SOCIO-ECONOMIC  impact OF RURAL ROAD IMPROVEMENTS IN GHANA: A CASE STUDY OF THE
TRANSPORT SECTOR PROGRAM (II).
Abstract System ID#: 295
Individual Paper
ASOMANI-BOATENG, Raymond [Minnesota State University Mankato] raymond.asomani-boateng@mnsu.edu,
presenting author
ADARKWA, Frank [University of Texas at Arlington] frank.adarkwa@mavs.uta.edu
Road transportation is the predominant mode of transportation in African countries and a critical element for
economic development (Porter, Blaufuss & Owusu-Acheampong, 2011; Thompson, 2011; Donnges, Edmonds &
Johhanessen 2007). The high reliance on road transportation has led to major road investment in Sub-Saharan Africa
(Braithwaite, 2003). With a goal of revitalizing rural economies and reducing poverty, the Ghana transportation Sector
Program prioritized improvement and maintenance of rural feeder road system (Republic of Ghana Ministry of
Roads and Transport, 1997). This study employs a case study approach to assess the socio-economic  impact of
rural road improvements in three northern regions of Ghana. The study measured ex ante/ex post changes in
household income and expenditures, crop production, the usage of motorized vehicles, access to markets, school
and health facilities and transportation charges. The analysis revealed that road improvements led to increased use of
motorized transport, with growth in household income and personal expenditures along each subject road
corridor. However, increased transportation charges also signified soaring fuel prices (Cantore, Antimiani & Anciaes,
2012) and the difficulties in maintaining road networks, potentially impacting access to markets, school and
health facilities. These findings suggest that Ghana should better coordinate road maintenance and utilize its
natural gas reserves with a program developing natural gas fuels and alternative fuel vehicles. The use of
alternative fuel vehicles in concert with rural road improvements could improve access and make transportation less
vulnerable to petroleum market fluctuations.
References
 Braithwaite M. (2003). Sub-Saharan Africa transportation Policy Program (SSATP) review of national transport
and poverty reduction strategies: guidelines. SSATP Working Paper no. 77, (December).
 Cantore, N., Antimian, A., Anciaes, P., (2012). Energy price shocks. Sweet and sour consequences for
developing countries. Working Paper 355. Overseas Development Institute. London, UK.
 Donnges, C., Edmonds, G., Johannessen, B. (2007). Rural Road Maintenance: Sustaining the Benefits of
Improved Access. Washington, D.C.: International Labor Organization (ILO).
 Porter, G. Blaufuss, K. and Owusu-Acheampong, F. (2011). Filling the family transportation gap in Sub-Saharan
Africa: Young people and load carrying in Ghana. in Holt, L. (Ed.) Geographies of Children, Youth and
Families: An International Perspective. London: Routledge. pp. 189-202.
 Republic of Ghana Ministry of Roads and Transport. (1997). Road sub-sector strategy and investment
program: 1997 review report. Accra.

Abstract Index #: 352
THE ROLE OF INSTITUTIONS AND SOCIAL NETWORKS IN PROMOTING RESILIENCE IN REGIONAL COFFEE
CLUSTERS

Abstract System ID#: 343
Individual Paper
DOUTHAT, Thomas [Georgia Institute of Technology] tdouthat3@gatech.edu, presenting author, primary author
ELLIOTT, Michael [Georgia Institute of Technology] michael.elliott@coa.gatech.edu
Research Question:
This research explores the link between resilience and collaborative governance in terms of the ability of regions
to retain key industries in the face of global and environment shocks and stressors. Industrial resilience requires
productive adaptations that help maintain a local industry’s place in the evolving structure of the regional
economy. Previous research suggests such resilience emerges in part from cooperatively structured industry
governance linked to more open knowledge and collaborative networks, but this research is largely restricted to
manufacturing industries in developed countries. Within the context of more land-intensive agricultural
industries in developing countries, this research explores the extent to which institutional arrangements
determine issues of trust and reciprocity, as well as network closure and openness, and the impact this has on
the resilience of regional coffee industries in Mexico and Costa Rica. Coffee is an ideal industry in which to study
local industry resilience, because it is both geographically sensitive and global in terms of production, and
especially sensitive to environment and economic shocks. Furthermore, the industry has recently emerged from
a period of international market restructuring, deemed the "coffee crisis."
Hypotheses:
This research hypothesizes first that coffee production clusters with stronger local networks and more open
external networks are more resilient, and second, that higher levels of collaborative governance, measured
through the importance of cooperatives in local coffee economies, lead to better outcomes for the industry as a
whole. The rationale for these hypotheses is as follows: (1) Firms benefit from social capital when trust reduces
transaction costs and creates knowledge exchange, (2) a local industry’s openness and capacity to connect to
outside networks is important for efficient and resilient relationships higher-up commodity chains, and (3)
cooperatives promote trust and reciprocity within members of a community (or potentially an economic cluster),
which allows for social networks of collaboration to form that enable productive relationships furthering
prosocial behaviors.
Methods:
To test these predictions, we compare how institutional configurations within regional coffee clusters – the ways
in which coffee growers organize themselves to process and market their product as well as manage local threats
to coffee growing – impact network openness and strength, as well as trust, using Social Network Analysis (SNA).
With SNA we measure the horizontal and vertical relationships of the industry’s key local actors and local coffee
mills (n=100) in eight different regions. We relate this information to data regarding ability to sustain production
levels and qualitative evidence of adaptation and innovation during a critical ten year time period (2001-2012)
that saw wholesale changes in the coffee industry. This analysis compares social capital among actors in local
coffee industries (small private mills, transnational mills, and cooperative) as well as among coffee clusters
(resilient clusters, declining clusters, highly cooperative clusters, and low cooperative clusters). Of note, this
research is further informed by extensive survey and case study analysis of these clusters.
Importance:
Planners are tasked with helping to create strategies and institutions that foster the evolution of regional
industries in a way that supports the well-being of local populations. In the case of agriculture, this strikes at the
heart of place identity, and represents not only socio-economic, but also socio-ecological relationships with the
land. Understanding what forms of institutional and social organization best support resilient adaptive behavior
among actors in local agricultural industry networks can directly inform planning approaches to support regional
development in agricultural comminuty in the global south.
References
 Simmie, James, and Ron Martin. "The economic resilience of regions: towards an evolutionary
approach." Cambridge journal of regions, economy and society3, no. 1 (2010): 27-43.







Morrison, Andrea, and Roberta Rabellotti. "Knowledge and information networks in an Italian wine
cluster." European Planning Studies 17, no. 7 (2009): 983-1006.
Giuliani, Elisa. "Network dynamics in regional clusters: Evidence from Chile. "Research Policy 42, no. 8
(2013): 1406-1419.
Eisingerich, Andreas B., Simon J. Bell, and Paul Tracey. "How can clusters sustain performance? The role
of network strength, network openness, and environment uncertainty." Research Policy 39, no. 2
(2010): 239-253.
Dempwolf, C. Scott, and L. Ward Lyles. "The uses of social network analysis in planning: A review of the
literature." Journal of Planning Literature (2011): 0885412211411092.

Abstract Index #: 353
NEGOTIATING GOVERNANCE: THE CASE OF CHINA SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONE PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 384
Individual Paper
SHEN, Qianqi [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] qshen@ejb.rutgers.edu
This paper studies how decentralization and spatially delimited zones have been used to govern China's economic
transformation and in what way these experiences challenge traditional debates on states and decentralization.
For over three decades, decentralization has been the most significant government restructuring activity
worldwide, claiming to achieve development and democracy through dissolving power to local levels. However,
none of these works have questioned the central assumption underlying these discussions: the fixity of a
structure with unchanged boundaries of authority. The chief goal of decentralization is expected to be a fixed
structure, e.g. federalism. Not much attention has been paid to the bargaining process that keeps the authority
boundaries fluid. Despite much excellent work on this subject, scholars have not yet fully explored how
decentralization has been redefined in the developing countries in such ways that have not always led to social
justice regardless of the influence of the international development discourse.
This study will remedy this gap by examining the intergovernmental bargaining that targeted the planning of
three development zones in two urban regions in China (i.e. Binhai New Area in Tianjin, Guangzhou Development
Zone, and Nansha New Area in Guangzhou). This study focuses on what has made the assumingly fixed structure
fluid: the implicit and explicit bargaining between the center and the subnational governments. Through a close
and fine-grained case comparison of the planning process of development zones in three regions, I will show how
inter-governmental negotiation—explicitly through open communication and interactions and implicitly through
non-compliance, rule violation, or other tacit strategies—works as a key mechanism to engender development
strategies that bring about different paths of development. The research explores two questions: How does intergovernmental negotiation function as a mechanism of governance? And how do paths of development
differentiated by the forms of collaborative relationships?
In this study, these zones are analyzed as platforms for inter-governmental contestations, instead of being
examined with the conventional approach of seeing zones as examples of successful policy implementation. The
theoretical framework that developed from this study can open a new window to examine the multi-scalar multilevel competitive and collaborative intergovernmental interactions. This paper contributes to convert the ‘China
story’ into richer Chinese stories, and also provides examples of instruments and governance structures in
Chinese planning today. It also provides wider theoretical and practical relevance to spatially delimited economic
zones in other countries and posts questions that challenge theoretical understanding of the role of planning in
international development.
References
 Swyngedouw. (1997). Neither Global nor Local: “Glocalization” and the Politics of Scale. In K. Cox (Ed.),
Spaces of Globalization: Reasserting the Power of the Local. The Guilford Press.
 Riker, W. H. (1964). Federalism: Origin, Operation, Significance (p. 169). Little, Brown.





Brenner, N. (2004a). New State Spaces: Urban Governance and the Rescaling of Statehood (p. 372). New
York: Oxford University Press, USA
Brenner, N., Jessop, B., Jones, M., & MacLeod, G. (2003). Introduction: State Space in Question. In N.
Brenner, B. Jessop, M. Jones, & G. MacLeod (Eds.), State/Space: a reader. Blackwell Publishers Ltd.
Faguet, J.-P. (2014). Decentralization and Governance. World Development, 53, 2–13.
doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2013.01.002

Abstract Index #: 354
TEN CONSIDERATIONS IN SUSTAINING PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT IN TRANSFORMATIVE PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 390
Pre-organized Session: Beyond Boilerplate Participatory Planning: Notes from the Field
UMEMOTO, Karen [University of Hawaii] kumemoto@hawaii.edu, presenting author, primary author
MIAO, Tai-An [University of Hawaii at Manoa] taian@hawaii.edu
Meaningful change often involves the transformation of policy, rules, system, program and people through
collaborative planning processes that engage stakeholders over an extended period. While there has been a
growing literature on collaborative planning, there is little that focuses on the specific role of planners in
facilitating collaborative planning processes and even less on sustaining public engagement over extended
periods time often required to enact change. We take the idea of transformative planning, building upon the
general definition that emphasizes “participatory planning that empowers the community to act in its own
interests” (Kennedy 2009), and integrate ideas from the social learning tradition of planning that emphasizes
mutual learning towards collective understanding and action. This paper presents a conceptual framework for
transformative planning from which the authors outline ten considerations for sustaining public engagement
towards transformational ends.
These considerations are based on a summary review of the literature on transformative planning and public
engagement along with a process of reflective praxis involving two different types of planning initiatives for
which the coauthors served as planning facilitators from 2007-2014. One planning process was a grassrootsbased effort to establish a youth and family service center in a rural community. The second was a multi-sector
systems change effort among a diverse range of stakeholders to reform juvenile justice practices. Both took place
in Hawaii and each of the planning processes spanned a period of over 2 years.
Sustained engagement requires the cultivation of commitment to work towards a goal that is continually evolving
as well as dedication to overcome the inevitable challenges and obstacles that bottom-up change initiatives often
confront. Public engagement in bottom-up planning processes is often difficult to sustain due to the fact that
there is often no authority at the top that is incentivizing participation. Yet bottom-up process can generate a
great deal of innovation as community advocates and public and private sector staff on the front-lines get
together to collaboratively tackle problems they share. Ten considerations for sustaining public engagement in
planning address the following: creating common ground, enjoying short term successes, gaining representation
under norms of inclusivity, growing place-based leadership, nurturing a culture of collaboration, building
organizational and individual capacity, fostering personal enrichment and empowerment, creating spaces for
synergistic creativity, routinizing social learning, and stewarding adaptive problem-solving. Examples from the
two planning process are used to illustrate the lessons that have implications for planning theory and practice.
References
 Coaffee, Jon and Patsy Healey. 2003. "‘My Voice: My Place’: Tracking Transformations in Urban
Governance " Urban Studies 40(10):1979-1999.
 Healey, Patsy. 2008. "Civic Engagement, Spatial Planning and Democracy as a Way of Life." Planning
Theory & Practice 9(3):379-382.
 Innes, Judith E and David E Booher. 2010. Planning with Complexity: An Introduction to Collaborative
Rationality for Public Policy: Routledge.




Kennedy, Marie. 2009. "Transformative Planning for Community Development." IRLE Working Paper,
University of California, Los Angeles.
Lane, Marcus B. 2005. "Public Participation in Planning: An Intellectual History." Australian Geographer
36(3):283-299.

Abstract Index #: 355
WHAT DETERMINES THE SETTLEMENT INTENTION OF RURAL MIGRANTS IN CHINA? ECONOMIC INCENTIVES
VERSUS SOCIOCULTURAL ATTACHMENT
Abstract System ID#: 392
Individual Paper
CHEN, Shaowei [Tsinghua University] chen-sw12@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Large-scale rural-urban migration in China has sparked a considerable interest in the settlement patterns of
migrants from both scholars and policy makers. In the international migration literature, two competing theories
have dominated the debate over determinants of migrant settlement intention and outcomes, though scholars
have yet to reach a consensus over which factors are more important. An earlier theory, derived from the
neoclassical economics, emphasizes the economic incentives in host and origin countries and depicts the
settlement decision as a process to maximize the value of migrants’ human capital. The other theory, rooted in
sociology, stresses the sociocultural conditions and asserts that social attachment and integration are of crucial
importance to migrants’ settlement decisions. The bulk of literature in China’s rural-to-urban migrants has put
their emphasis on formal institutions such as the hukou system, or argue the “settlement vs. return” decision is
part of a family strategy of migrants to maximize economic opportunities while mitigating the hukou-based
constraints.
This paper seeks to identify the factors that influence the settlement intention of rural migrants in urban China.
More specifically, we investigate 1) what factors – economic incentives or sociocultural conditions – determines
the settlement intention of rural migrants in urban China? 2) Does the determinants differ between different age
cohorts, i.e. between the so-called 1st and 2nd generation migrants? Based on the data derived from a twelvecity migrant survey conducted in 2009, statistical analysis revealed that 1) social ties, attachment, and integration
are, in general, more influential than economic incentive factors (e.g. human capital and economic opportunities)
in deciding settlement intention of rural migrants in China, and 2) relative to 1st generation, the 2nd generation
migrants’ settlement decision is more influenced by economic incentive factors.
We believe that this research not only contributes to the scholarly understanding of rural-to-urban migration in
China, but also sheds lights to current policy making that promote urban integration of migrant populations in
urban societies in wave of people-oriented urbanization in China.
References
 Zhu, Y. and Chen, W. (2010) “The Settlement intention of China's floating population in the city: Recent
changes and multifaceted individual-level determinants”, Population, Space and Place, 16(4): 253-67.
 De Vroome, T. & van Tubergen, F. (2014) Settlement Intentions of Recently Arrived Immigrants and
Refugees in the Netherlands, Journal of Immigrant & Refugee Studies, 12 (1), pp. 47-66, DOI:
10.1080/15562948.2013.810798.
 Fan, C.C. (2011). Settlement Intention and Split Households: Findings from a Survey of Migrants in
Beijing’s Urban Villages. The China Review, 11(2), 11-42.
 Massey, D.S. (1987) “Understanding Mexican migration to the United States”, American Journal of
Sociology, 92: 1372–1403.
 Massey, D.S. and Akresh, I.R. (2006) “Immigrant intentions and mobility in a global economy: The
attitudes and behavior of recently arrived US immigrants”, Social Science Quarterly, 87(5): 954-71.

Abstract Index #: 356
MEETING BASIC NEEDS: HOW SOCIAL ENTERPRISES BLUR BOUNDARIES BETWEEN THE PUBLIC, PRIVATE AND
THIRD SECTOR FOR SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC IMPACT IN COLOMBIA, MEXICO, KENYA, AND SOUTH AFRICA
Abstract System ID#: 443
Individual Paper
HANLEY, Lisa [Zeppelin University] lmh48@cornell.edu
Policy makers around the world, attempting to capitalize on innovative and market oriented business models, are
increasingly promoting the role of social enterprises in the provision of basic goods and services. In 2014, the G8
countries launched a Social Impact Investment Taskforce aiming to foster social investment markets across G8
nations and the US National Advisory Board on impact investing stressed the need for a more intentional and
proactive partnership between government and the private sector if impact investing is to reach massive scale.
Further policy directives to promote social innovations have been enacted at the national level in emerging
markets, for example in Colombia a center for Social Innovation was founded in 2011 as a part of the Agency for
the Alleviation of Extreme Poverty (ANPSE). Within this context, social enterprise has emerged in an effort to
emphasize profit and/or market orientation with a social mission through innovative and efficient approaches to
services and goods that address poverty and poverty related needs (Seelos, 2009). Yet, little is understood about
the role and impact of social enterprise in the delivery of basic goods and services as well their relationship
between the government, the private, and third sector, particularly in developing and emerging markets.
In an effort to better understand the landscape of social enterprises in emerging markets, 1,124 organizations in
Colombia, Mexico, Kenya, and South Africa were surveyed in 2013/14 (response 289). This study differs from
most other research approaches on social enterprises by not applying a set definition, but rather organizations
were included in the sample if they had been successful in acquiring social investment and hence had been
identified as appropriate target recipients for social investors. Through an analysis of the survey, this paper sheds
light on planning and the new labor division in the international development landscape among the private,
public and third sectors for social and economic impact in emerging markets, as well as the growing legitimacy of
market oriented, for-profit organizations as partners for service delivery. The paper explores how social
enterprises partner, collaborate, and compete with the public, private and third sectors and how they can
contribute to social and economic impact, as well as the tensions created through the dual goal of social and
financial return. Lastly the paper explores the importance of developing national and international criteria for
social enterprises in order to develop policy that contribute to clear organizational structures and accountability
mechanisms that help preserve the social mission and erode the ambiguousness of the term.
References
 Fine, B and D. Hall. (2012) Terrains of Neoliberalism: Constraints and Opportunities for Alternative
Models of Service Delivery in Alternatives to Privatization: Public Options for Essential Services in the
Global South ed. D. McDonald and G. Ruiters p.45-65
 Jessop, R. D. (2002). The future of the capitalist state. Polity.
 Seelos et al. (2010). Embededdness of Social Entrepreneurship: Understanding Variations across Local
Communities. Working Paper 858 IESE School of Business University of Navarra.

Abstract Index #: 357
IS IT POSSIBLE TO PLAN URBAN RENEWAL THAT DOES NOT CAUSE DISPLACEMENT?
Abstract System ID#: 457
Individual Paper
AY, Deniz [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] denizay1@illinois.edu
Governments initiate urban renewal to promote various positive objectives, but these projects also usually
displace existing residents. Is it possible to plan redevelopment projects that modernize city without burdening
existing residents? Why do even well-intentioned projects always seem to cause undesirable displacement? This

paper explores these questions through a study of the planning process of an ambitious government-led urban
redevelopment policy in Turkey. Despite the comprehensive national scale of this urban renewal program
enacted under complex legislation, it formally neglects consideration of residential displacement. My objective is
to explain why such a bold national urban “transformation” policy is carried out without deliberate planning for
displacement. I use case study methodology and adopt a multiple-embedded case study design. My cases are
three metropolitan city; Adana, Bursa and Izmir. I build my research on a variety of data sources including (1)
semi-structured interviews with the local government officials, representatives of professional organizations,
elected neighborhood representatives and neighborhood associations; (2) documentation and (3) participant
observation. Preliminary findings suggest that local governments perceive residential displacement as an intrinsic
component of urban redevelopment and do not recognize displacement as a downside of development. Instead,
local governments often consider the prospects of displacement as a tool to integrate the marginalized
communities with the rest of the city. Displacement is predominantly viewed as a threat by the low-income
groups, living at subsistence level. These groups tend to organize to resist displacement prospects only if they
closely know about another process of residential displacement that took place in their city. The larger question
I address in this research is how development can take place without displacement. To study this, my goal is to
explain how redevelopment creates displacement and how it ignores the challenges of resettlement, even when
it is ostensibly well-intentioned. The case of Turkey provides an example of a national scale redevelopment
implemented in different city. This allows me to conduct a variety of comparative cases all under the umbrella
of the larger national policy. The similarities and differences among cases highlight the opportunities as well as
bottlenecks for urban development that does not displace masses.
References
 Marcuse, P. (1986) ‘Abandonment, gentrification and displacement: the linkages in New York City’, in N.
Smith and P. Williams (eds) Gentrification of the City, pp. 153–177. London: Unwin Hyman.
 Oliver-Smith, A. (2001). Displacement, resistance and the critique of development: From the grass roots
to the global. Development-Induced Displacement: Problems, policy, and People.
 Koenig, D. (2011). Multiple Actors and Contested Terrains: Strategies of Pro-poor Action in
Contemporary Urban Restructuring. Journal of Developing Societies, 27(3-4), 327–353.
 Kuyucu, T., & Unsal, O. (2010). “Urban Transformation” as State-led Property Transfer: An Analysis of
Two Cases of Urban Renewal in Istanbul. Urban Studies, 47(7), 1479–1499.
 Parnell, S., & Robinson, J. (2012). (Re)theorizing city from the Global South: Looking Beyond
Neoliberalism. Urban Geography, 33(4), 593–617.

Abstract Index #: 358
EXPERIMENTATION AND “SLOW LEARNING”: TRANSNATIONAL MIGRATION AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
IN THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Abstract System ID#: 459
Pre-organized Session: The Politics of Making and Re-making: Transnationalism, Circulation and the Emergent in
Urban and Community Development
LAMBA NIEVES, Deepak [Watson Institute, Brown University] deepakln@brown.edu
Although the origins of American city planning can be traced back to the plight of immigrants in the expanding
industrial city of the early 20th century, their voices and interests have been mostly absent from the field’s
literatures today. A more recent strand of work has begun to fill this gap by employing and advocating for the use
of a transnational perspective to make sense of the complex social dynamics that emerge in places where
migration is a way of life. Some of the more eloquent projects in this vein explain how migrants and those left
behind help weave complex webs of interaction that link home and destination comminuty and the resulting
opportunities and challenges that emerge across borders (Sarmiento & Beard 2013, Sandoval 2013).
According to Roy (2011) the transnational turn within the planning discipline opens new opportunities to rethink
the discipline’s claims of being a global enterprise, where world-spanning trends turn into fashionable models
and normative templates of the trade.

In doing so, it opens the possibility to rethink some of the conceptual categories that planners often use when
designing their interventions, and to come up with novel examples of how to address challenges and
opportunities brought about by increased migrant flows.
This paper employs a transnational optic to examine how three Dominican hometown associations (HTAs)—
which can be defined as voluntary organizations whose members share a common place of origin and generate
support to carry out projects in home and migrant comminuty—engage in transnational community
development through a series of projects pursued in their hometowns, located in the southern region of the
Dominican Republic. It focuses specifically on the routines that HTAs employ to achieve their goals and how these
organizations have a tendency to seek answers to complex development issues through experimentation. This is
due, in great part, to the absence of a specific set of national program or formal policy structures that encourage
and prioritize specific HTA investments or steer community organizations towards specific development
solutions—like Mexico’s 3-for-1 matching funds program.
As the ethnographic data collected throughout a 5-year period in Boston, New York, and the Dominican Republic
shows, being able to experiment and troubleshoot allows the organizations to sidestep the strictures of “fast
policy” (Peck and Tickle 2002) and programmatic “monocropping” (Evans 2004), which in turn, provides them
opportunities to engage in “slow learning” (Roy 2011). That is, in the absence of formal structures, learning
becomes a continuously evolving exercise. Nevertheless, learning opportunities come in many guises, so
development trials can lead to important process innovations, but also costly mistakes. In light of this, the ability
to identify and make the most out of unforeseen development consequences stemming from experimental
projects becomes a fundamental community planning skill for HTAs.
References
 Evans, P. (2004). “Development as Institutional Change: The Pitfalls of Monocropping and the Potentials
of Deliberation.” Studies in Comparative International Development 38 (4): 30–52.
 Peck, J., & Tickle, A. (2002). “Neoliberalizing Space”. Antipode, 34(3), 380-404.
 Roy, A. (2011). “Commentary Placing Planning in the World—Transnationalism as Practice and Critique”.
Journal of Planning Education and Research, 31(4), 406-415.
 Sandoval, G. F. (2013). “Shadow Transnationalism Cross-Border Networks and Planning Challenges of
Transnational Unauthorized Immigrant comminuty”. Journal of Planning Education and Research,
33(2), 176-193.
 Sarmiento, C. S., & Beard, V. A. (2013). “Traversing the Border Community-Based Planning and
Transnational Migrants”. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 33(3), 336-347.

Abstract Index #: 359
PLANNING FOR DISASTER RESILIENCE IN RURAL INDIA: CHALLENGES FOR SURVIVORS OF THE 2013 FLASH
FLOODS IN THE HIMALAYAS
Abstract System ID#: 472
Individual Paper
ARLIKATTI, Sudha [University of North Texas] Sudha.Arlikatti@unt.edu
Despite a growing body of literature on how sustainable  land_use planning, shelter and housing policy help
reduce or eliminate long-term threats of natural disasters in urban area, there is limited understanding of how
these impact rural comminuty in developing countries. This article aims to bridge this gap by investigating the
effects of the 2013 flash floods on rural households in the Himalayan State of Uttarakhand in North India. It
highlights the protective actions taken by survivors immediately following the flash flood. It also discusses the
challenges faced by government and nongovernmental agencies in providing temporary and permanent shelters
to those who lost their lands and homes to the flash flood and landslides.
This article analyzes data collected from 316 survivors of the 2013 flash floods from 17 villages in North India. It
investigates how demographic characteristics, type of warnings received, risk perception, disaster experience,

damage to home and property and location of the village (plain, midland or mountain) influenced the decisions to
evacuate and search for temporary shelters and select locations for post disaster permanent housing. Preliminary
results indicate that most respondents received their first information about the flood from social sources such as
friends, family and other villagers (45.9%) and saw it coming themselves (42.1%). Most respondents reported
their homes were either moderately damaged (14.6%), severely damaged (25.0%), or completely destroyed
(48.4%). Findings clearly demonstrate that although 98% villagers had never experienced a flash flood in their
lifetime, their social perceptions and traditional knowledge of their environment motivated them to evacuate
and take actions that ultimately saved the lives of their families and themselves. However their search for
temporary shelters and permanent housing is fraught with challenges related to finding safe public land for
relocation and rebuilding, livelihood recovery and efforts to meet sustainable  land_use planning goals.
The article concludes by emphasizing the need to plan for rural resiliency as a goal for these recovering
communities in the Himalayas. It calls for approaching post-disaster shelter planning not simply as a basic
material human need, but an integral part of social identity, mental well-being, and the reconstitution of
economic livelihood. There is agreement that the most influential fields affecting the resilience of the built
environment are design, planning, engineering and construction. Thus it is important that the central, state and
local government including the public works department, engineers and planners and nongovernmental agencies
involve citizens in planning for rural resiliency. It is important to use citizens’ indigenous knowledge and social
and community ties in setting up a robust disaster warning system and creating a regional shelter plan. Doing this
will ensure that climate related and sustainability initiatives are part of a comprehensive rural planning strategy
and not just a missed opportunity.
References
 Arlikatti, S. & Andrew, S. (2012). Housing Design and Long-term Recovery Processes in the Aftermath of
the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami. Natural Hazards Review, 13(1): 34-44. DOI: 10.1061/ (ASCE) NH.15276996.0000062.
 Berke, P. R., & Campanella, T. J. (2006). Planning for postdisaster resiliency.The Annals of the American
Academy of Political and Social Science, 604(1), 192-207.
 Burby, R. J., Deyle, R. E., Godschalk, D. R., & Olshansky, R. B. (2000). Creating hazard resilient
communities through land-use planning. Natural hazards review,1(2), 99-106.
 Olshansky, R. B. (2006). Planning after hurricane Katrina. Journal of the American Planning Association,
72(2), 147-153.
 Schwab, J. (1998). Planning for post-disaster recovery and reconstruction (No. 483-484). Federal
Emergency Management Agency.

Abstract Index #: 360
PILOT PROJECTS AND HIGH PROFILE INTERVENTIONS: IMMEDIACY, VISIBILITY AND THE MAKING OF
TRANSPORTATION REFORM IN MEXICO CITY
Abstract System ID#: 545
Pre-organized Session: The Politics of Making and Re-making: Transnationalism, Circulation and the Emergent in
Urban and Community Development
SOSA LOPEZ, Oscar [University of California, Berkeley] oscarsosa@berkeley.edu
Since 2006 Mexico City has been the site of large investments in sustainable transportation, including an
expanding bus rapid transit network and growing bicycle share and smart parking management system. At the
same time, the city has seen an increase of private investment in urban highways and automobile infrastructure.
This renewed attention to transportation has been framed in terms of a turn toward “urban mobility” policy, in
which the meaning of transportation infrastructure has been re-defined. This re-signification of the purpose of
infrastructure has served as an organizing discourse around which a variety of actors and technologies have been
mobilized in efforts to enable local urban reforms. As a result, state and non-state actors today speak of
transportation infrastructure and services as tools that can create a more sustainable, inclusive and democratic
city.

This paper traces the assemblage of urban mobility as an emergent policy space in Mexico City by analyzing the
politics behind an ongoing transportation reform. I argue that technologies such as bus rapid transit, bikeshare
infrastructure and smart parking system have facilitated new spaces for political engagement through which city
officials, international NGOs, experts and citizens re-define the meaning of sustainability, democracy and the
right to the city. While the actors making this emergent policy space all mobilize global best-practices, my
analysis shows how policy are implemented through political compromises among actors with different
understandings of the substance of policy, but who agree on the need to achieve short-term success. Under this
logic, transportation policy in Mexico City has focused on “pilot” projects and high profile interventions deployed
in area of the city that bring high visibility and where political conflict can be avoided. I call this the “politics of
immediacy and visibility” and argue that this is an essential strategy used by policy actors to bring credibility and
legitimacy to reformist agendas with the hope that they can take hold over time and across space, in other
words, be replicated and be sustained. However, decisions on infrastructure have long term effects in the
material and political dimensions of the city, and this analysis shows tensions between the immediacy and
visibility of current projects and the prospects of achieving the desired goals of reform.
This work also sheds light on two important moments in the process of policy-making: the process by which
policies and best practices take new meanings as they are implemented; and the process by which the sites of
intervention are chosen in efforts to smooth out policy. I argue that paying attention to these moments allows us
to better understand the political dynamics behind urban sustainability reforms and the logics that legitimize
distribution of infrastructure and “sustainability fixes” (While, Jonas, and Gibbs 2004). Ultimately, this paper
contributes to debates on policy mobilities (Peck and Theodore 2010; McCann, Ward, and Cochrane 2011), the
politics of infrastructure (Monstadt 2009) and planning in metropolises of the global south (Miraftab 2009; Roy
2011). This analysis draws on extensive qualitative and ethnographic work including participant observation of
meetings in-depth interviews with planners, policy makers and civil society actors, and in archival research of
media coverage.
References
 McCann, E., K. Ward, and A. Cochrane. 2011. Mobile Urbanism: city and Policymaking in the Global
Age. Vol. 17. University of Minnesota Press.
 Miraftab, F. 2009. “Insurgent Planning: Situating Radical Planning in the Global South.” Planning Theory
8 (1): 32–50.
 Monstadt, J. 2009. “Conceptualizing the Political Ecology of Urban Infrastructures: Insights from
Technology and Urban Studies.” Environment and Planning. A 41 (8): 1924.
 Peck, Jamie, and Nik Theodore. 2010. “Mobilizing Policy: Models, Methods, and Mutations.” Geoforum
41 (2): 169–74.
 Roy, Ananya. 2011. “Commentary: Placing Planning in the World—Transnationalism as Practice and
Critique.” Journal of Planning Education and Research

Abstract Index #: 361
CRIME IN INFORMAL AND FORMAL PUBLIC TRANSIT system: A COMPARISON OF USER PERCEPTIONS IN EL
ALTO, BOLIVIA AND BOGOTÃ AND SOACHA, COLOMBIA
Abstract System ID#: 562
Individual Paper
KASH, Gwen [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] gwenkash@email.unc.edu
In developing city, where income inequality is often compounded by severe spatial segregation, affordable
transportation is vital to marginalized populations’ ability to access social and economic resources. Innovations
such as Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) are therefore a vital tool for sustainable, equitable development (Hidalgo and
Gutierrez, 2013). While BRT has resulted in major improvements to sustainability and travel times, transit crime –
both robbery and sexual assault – remains an intractable problem. Some of the most prominent BRT system in

the world have also been identified as some of the most dangerous (Thomson Reuters Foundation, 2014). This
undermines the system’ ability to help low-income residents, particularly women, access opportunities.
This project examines the causes and consequences of crime in informal and formal transit by comparing the two
Latin American transit system: (1) the informal transit of El Alto, Bolivia and (2) the TransMilenio BRT system,
which serves Bogotá, Colombia as well as the neighboring municipality of Soacha. Through quantitative transit
user survey data, qualitative interviews with users and professionals, and direct observation of the transit
systems, I identify the characteristics of these two very different transit system that facilitate crime. I then
document how the actual incidence and perceived risk of crime cause residents to change their travel behavior or
constrain their mobility. Finally, I discuss the differences between robbery and sexual assault in terms of their
affects on transit users and awareness of the problem among policymakers.
I find that crime in the two system arises from two opposite sources. The small vehicles that dominate El Alto’s
informal system create risk by isolating passengers from potential sources of aid. Meanwhile, intense crowding in
TransMilenio forces passengers into extremely close proximity with others, making it difficult to safeguard
oneself and one’s possessions. Regardless of source, the risk of crime negatively affects transit users’ travel
behavior and their subjective, emotional experiences of travel, eroding quality of life.
By documenting the broad extent of transit crime’s negative effects, even among those who have not been
directly victimized, this study demonstrates the urgency of creating transit system that are both sustainable and
safe. By identifying sources of crime, it provides a means of evaluating suggested solutions such as defensible
space and women-only transit cars. Additionally, while bringing the voices of the victims of crime, particularly
women, into transit planning has been recognized as a vital tool for improving safety (Wekerle, 2005). This type
of public involvement is often seen as difficult in developing countries, particularly since most theories of public
involvement in planning are based on developed countries (Vasconcellos, 2001; Fainstein, 2010). This project
demonstrates a method of accomplishing this task, even in the absence of pre-existing, robust mechanisms for
public participation.
References
 Fainstein, Susan. The Just City. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press, 2010.
 Hidalgo, Darío, and Luis Gutiérrez. “BRT and BHLS around the World: Explosive Growth, Large Positive
Impacts and Many Issues Outstanding.” Research in Transportation Economics 39, no. 1 (March 2013):
8–13. doi:10.1016/j.retrec.2012.05.018.
 Thomson Reuters Foundation. “Most Dangerous transportation system for Women.” Research Spotlight,
October 31, 2014. http://www.trust.org/spotlight/most-dangerous-transport-systems-for-women/.
 Vasconcellos, Eduardo Alcântara de. Urban Transport, Environment, and Equity: The Case for Developing
Countries. London, UK ; Sterling, VA: Earthscan, 2001.
 Wekerle, Gerda. “Gender Planning in Public Transit: Institutionalizing Feminist policy, Changing
Discourse, and Practices.” In Gender and Planning : A Reader, edited by Susan S Fainstein and Lisa J
Servon, 275–95. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 2005.

Abstract Index #: 362
INTRAURBAN SUBCENTERS IN TWO COUNTRIES WITH DIFFERENT LEVELS OF DEVELOPMENT. COMPARATIVE
RESEARCH BETWEEN SAN DIEGO, U.S.A, AND TIJUANA, MEXICO
Abstract System ID#: 613
Individual Paper
ALEGRIA, Tito [El Colegio de la Frontera Norte] talegria@colef.mx
The object of this paper is to show that the market economy generates different intraurban  land_use structures in
a city from a first world country and another from a developing country. Specifically, it will test whether the
organization of tertiary subcenters (trade and services) in San Diego, California, U.S.A., is different from that of
Tijuana, Baja California, Mexico in the following aspects: spatial distribution of the hierarchy of subcenters (urban

form), and the weight of both the increasing returns to scale/productivity (supply side) and the population's
income, segregation by income and density (demand side) on the generation of subcenters. This research draws
on the literature that critiques the monocentric and polycentric standard models of intraurban  land_uses and
supports the point of view that modern city have diverse type of economic spatial distribution ranging from
dispersal to subcenter’s hierarchy a la W. Christaller. To test the differences between both city mentioned
above, I first define the concept of tertiary subcenter and construct an indicator of the degree of centrality (GCj)
by neighborhood: the number of central functions. Second, the urban form of each city is defined with indicators
of the spatial distribution of the social groups and the hierarchy of centers (relative localization). Third, demand
and supply behavior are defined separately with regression models for each city, where the dependent variable is
GCj and the independent ones are indicative of business' production scale & productivity and of the population's
income and density. Fourth, I will compare statistically, on the one hand, the two functions of urban form, and on
the other hand, the two regression equations. This comparison will tell us whether Tijuana and San Diego are
different in both the urban form and the generating mechanism of the hierarchy of subcenters. In this research,
the assumption about institutional influence on intraurban  land_uses is that urban plans generally follow the
spatial allocation of resources driven by market mechanisms in both countries. The data used is for the 1990s and
comes from population and economic censuses of Mexico and the United States; the geographical unit of analysis
is the census tract. This research has two conclusions relevant for urban_planning. First, in the explanation of
subcenters formation the tertiary and the manufacture activities should be analyzed in a separate way because
they have different localization factors. Second, city like Tijuana and San Diego -neighbors but belonging to
countries of asymmetrical development- have different both urban form structuring and planning priorities.
References
 ANDERSON, N. and W. BOGART (2001). "The Structure of Sprawl. Identifying and Characterizing
Employment Centers in Polycentric Metropolitan area". American Journal of Economics and Sociology,
Vol. 60, No. 1, pp 147 -169.
 FERNÁNDEZ-MALDONADO, A. M., A. ROMEIN, O. VERKOREN & R. P. P. PESSOA (2014). “Polycentric
Structures in Latin American Metropolitan area: Identifying Employment Sub-centres”. Regional
Studies, 48:12, 1954-1971.
 GARCIA-LÓPEZ, M. A. and I. MUÑIZ (2010). “Employment Decentralisation: Polycentricity or
Scatteration? The Case of Barcelona”. Urban Studies, December; vol. 47, 14.
 GORDON, Peter and Harry RICHARDSON (1996). "Beyond policentricity. The Dispersed Metrópolis, Los
Angeles, 1970 - 1990". Journal of the American Planning Association, Vol. 62, No. 3, pp. 289 - 295.
 WEST, Von HOHENBALKEN and KRONER (1985). "Test of Intraurban Central Place Theories". The
Economic Journal, Vol. 95, pp. 101 - 117.

Abstract Index #: 363
REVISITING KOREAN SAEMAUL MOVEMENT: PRESIDENT PARK’S EXPERIMENTS IN 1970S AND FORTY-YEAR
VILLAGERS’ ADAPTATION
Abstract System ID#: 633
Individual Paper
KIM, Chung Ho [University of Washington] charisut@uw.edu, presenting author, primary author
ABRAMSON, Daniel [University of Washington] abramson@uw.edu
The Korean Saemaul Movement (New Village Movement, New Rural Community Movement, or KSM) in the
1970s was a political initiative to modernize rural economy and to change traditional and unscientific mentality of
peasants, under the powerful top-down leadership of President Park, Chung-hee. Unlike highly controversial
debates on Park’s 18-year tenure as President (1961-1979), historical reviews of KSM are generally quite positive.
It has been regarded as one of the most positively influential governmental policy contributing to the national
development of the Republic of Korea. It has also been a popular modernization model for the Third World.
Nevertheless, KSM’s conversion of Korean traditional villages into new modern villages has not been fully
investigated in terms of built environments. Interestingly, President Park was the most influential and

experimental actor for the KSM’s conversion towards new built environments. He was basically not a person to
preach vague agenda and to be reported the progress. Rather, he deeply engaged national core projects such as
Gyeongbu (Seoul-Pusan) Expressway, Saemaul Movement, Heavy and Chemical Industrial Complex, and so on. He
personally drew sketches, calculated necessary resources, composed a song of Saemaul Movement, and designed
a model farmhouse and villages for Saemaul Movement. Under the context, this paper aims at unearthing
President Park’s experiments towards new built environments in 1970s, and tracing forty-year villagers’
adaptation and transformation for the experiments.
Since almost all capacity in 1970s Korea was mobilized in order to succeed in KSM, it fundamentally had a
complex and multi-faceted aspects ranging from national-scale plans to village-scale projects. Among them, this
paper especially focuses on two village-scale projects in the beginning of KSM which President Park initiated and
directly implemented: First Samaul House in Yong-in and First Saemaul Village in Cheon-an. The House was
designed as a weekend farmhouse by President Park in 1972. The Village was selected as one of the ten pilot
Saemaul villages in 1972, and newly built as a concentrated settlement composed of three housing types near
Gyeongbu Expressway. Both the houses and the villages still keep their original forms considerably because the
original keepers and most of the residents have lived there.
This paper’s field research was performed for two months in 2014 in Korea. The relevant literature, ArcGIS files,
and village-scale statistical data were collected. The open-ended interviews with keepers, residents, and relevant
scholars were also conducted according to the interview protocols which had been qualified by the University of
Washington Human Subjects Division. In addition, the visited houses and villages were directly measured, and
documented into architectural drawings. The pictures showing historical changes of houses and villages over time
were also gathered from the residents.
This paper placed Park’s experiments of built environments in the historical context of Korean traditional houses
and villages in order to identify and assess them. Then, the paper interpreted 40-year villagers’ adaptation and
transformation for Park’s experiments in two different scales: house-scale dealing with housing type, room
arrangement, extension, and so on, and village-scale covering village layout, road, common facilities, and etc.
Finally, the paper reached following conclusions: First, President Park’s experiments pursued westernized and
industrialized built environments which were totally different from Korean traditional houses and villages.
Second, in terms of house-scale adaptation and transformation, villagers tried to extend their houses
horizontally, especially in the storage, kitchen, and restroom. In addition, they have continuously upgraded their
resource managements in the water, fuel, sewer, and so on. Third, in terms of village-scale adaptation and
transformation, villagers pointed out the concentrated village layout’s advantages, and limitations due to
insufficient infrastructures including narrow farm streets, distant schools, and etc.
References
 Lo, F., Song, B.-N., & United Nations Centre for Regional Development. (1979). The Saemaul Undong:
The Korean way of rural transformation. Nagoya, Japan: United Nations Centre for Regional
Development.
 Boyer, W. W., & An, P. (1991). Rural development in South Korea: A sociopolitical analysis. Newark:
University of Delaware Press.
 Kim, H.-A., & Sorensen, C. W. (2011). Reassessing the Park Chung Hee era, 1961-1979: Development,
political thought, democracy, & cultural influence. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
 Saemaul Research Association. (1980). 10-year History of Saemaul Movement [Saemaul Undong 10
Nyeonsa]. Seoul, Korea: Ministry of Home Affairs.
 Integrated Research Institute of Saemaul Movement. (1981). Ideology and Actuality of Saemaul
Movement [Saemaul Undong Inyeom Goa Silje]. Seoul, Korea: Seoul National University.

Abstract Index #: 364
APPLICATION OF LAND READJUSTMENT IN POST-DISASTER RECONSTRUCTION PLANNING: A CASE OF BHUJ
(INDIA)
Abstract System ID#: 641

Individual Paper
BYAHUT, Sweta [Auburn University] szb0054@auburn.edu, presenting author
MITTAL, Jay [Auburn University] jay.mittal@auburn.edu, primary author
The objective of this paper is to present a detailed analysis of the application of the use of land readjustment
mechanism specifically in post-disaster reconstruction situation. While a disaster such as an earthquake or a
tsunami causes large scale devastation and destruction, these events have sometimes been used by planners for
large scale reconstitution of land holdings through application of planning tools such as land readjustment (or
land pooling). Land readjustment is a process of reconstitution of land holdings or lots into rational and regular
shaped lots, adding public infrastructure such as public roads and parks, the land for which is contributed
equitably by all landowners, as a percentage of their land holdings. Several examples are available from around
the world where local governments and policy makers have used such an approach while rebuilding lost housing
and infrastructure.
While land readjustment is commonly used for urban development and particularly for converting irregular
shaped agricultural lands to lots suitable for urban developments with street access and infrastructure, there are
few instances where it has been creatively applied in a post disaster reconstruction process. The paper will
examine some of these cases where land readjustment has been carried out specifically in the context of post
disaster reconstruction planning. For instance, the Hyogo Prefecture and the City of Kobe applied land
readjustment projects in conjunction with urban redevelopment and restoration to ensure that reconstructed
areas were built more resilient with wide streets, public open spaces for evacuation, and consolidated old and
dense housing (Preuss 2000). Chile also has limited experience with the same in Santiago (Hong and Brain 2012).
A successful example comes from the historic city of Bhuj, India where more than 50% of buildings in the city
were destroyed in an earthquake measuring 6.9 on the Richter scale that claimed approximately 18,000 lives in
Gujarat, India. One of the reasons for this heavy loss of life was because that many low-quality building fells onto
the narrow streets in the walled city, and the rubble blocked egress and prevented emergency vehicles to come
in. The state government embarked on a large scale reconstruction planning process which used land
readjustment as a key tool for inner city area. More than a decade after implementation, it is considered a
successful and shining example of reconstruction planning.
The people of Bhuj did not want to accept the government’s relocation policy and were not willing to move away
from their 500-year-old city to a safer, less-congested area, the government decided to reconstruct the inner city.
The comprehensive plan included several elements such as  land_use zoning, road network and infrastructure
planning, and inclusion of seismic safety regulations. A grid of interconnected streets was laid out using the land
cleared from collapsed buildings to ensure emergency access to the inner congested city. The land needed to
create this wider road network was assembled by the use of land readjustment mechanism, known as town
planning schemes (TP schemes). A proportionate amount of land was deducted from each land owner to create
wider public roads and increase access, and the remainder was readjusted and redistributed to the original
owners. Particularly notable is that all of this was done using the existing provisions in the state’s town planning
legislation. My paper will examine the case study of Bhuj in detail in the context of its successes and challenges,
and provide critical insights on this land readjustment implementation in a post disaster situation. Despite Bhuj’s
success, such reconstruction tools depend greatly on the existing legal and political system and may be difficult
to replicate in post-disaster reconstruction in other vulnerable urban area around the world.
References
 Balachandran, B.R. (2010) Planning the Reconstruction of Bhuj, in Recovering from Earthquakes:
Response, Reconstruction and Impact Mitigation in India. Editors Patel and Revi. Routledge, New Delhi.
 Byahut, Sweta (2014) Post-Earthquake Reconstruction Planning Using Land Readjustment in Bhuj (India),
Journal of the American Planning Association, 80:4, 440-441
 Preuss, Jane (2000). Housing Recovery after Kobe: The urban_planning Process. Presented at 12WCEE
2000.
 Tyabji, Azhar. 2006. Bhuj: Art, Architecture, History. Mapin Publishing.



Yu-Hung Hong and Isabel Brain (2012). Land Readjustment for Urban Development and Post-Disaster
Reconstruction. Land Lines. Lincoln Institute of Land Policy. January 2012

Abstract Index #: 365
UNDERSTANDING CHINESE PLANNING AND ITS LESSONS FOR THE WORLD
Abstract System ID#: 649
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session
SMITH, Nick [Yale-NUS College] nick.r.smith@gmail.com
ABRAMSON, Daniel [University of Washington] abramson@uw.edu
HAILA, Anne [University of Helsinki] Anne.Haila@helsinki.fi
WU, Fulong [University College London] fulong.wu@ucl.ac.uk
SHIH, Mi [University of Technology, Sydney] Mi.Shih@UTS.EDU.AU
FRIEDMANN, John [University of British Columbia] jrpf@mail.ubc.ca
After China's re-establishment of urban_planning in the late 1970s, Chinese planners faced unprecedented
challenges. The nation's social and economic liberalization introduced new urban dynamics, even as China's
institutions of politics and governance persisted. In response, Chinese planners and their international
collaborators have often turned to planning theories based in the practices of European and American planning.
By adapting these practices to the nation's social, political, and cultural institutions, the Chinese planning
community has developed new, hybridized planning approaches. For instance, development control planning is
modeled on Euro-American zoning practices but adapted to Chinese governance structures. At the same time,
persistent critiques of "planning failure" suggest that these imports may not always fully explain Chinese planning
practice. These gaps are often interpreted as failures of practice, but they may also point to the need for new
interpretive lenses that better reflect the realities of China's cultural and institutional context.
As Chinese urbanization enters a period of slower, "new normal" growth, Chinese planning is confronted with
another period of re-invention. This shift offers an opportunity to revisit the interpretive assumptions of the past
three decades and propose new directions for the development of planning theory and practice. Given China's
size and its role in global urbanization processes, critical reflections on Chinese planning also have implications
for how we understand planning practices elsewhere in the world. This roundtable seeks to foster such a
conversation by posing the following questions:
1.

What Chinese planning practices have been effectively explained by existing interpretive lenses, and
what practices are still not well understood?

2.

What interpretive tools (from social theory, planning theory, cultural analysis, etc.) might help us better
understand such practices?

3.

What implications do these new insights have for our understanding of planning practices elsewhere in
the world?

Proposed area of inquiry include issues such as community, markets, and participation.
References
 Friedmann, John. 2005. China’s Urban Transition. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
 Wu, Fulong. 2015. Planning for Growth: Urban and Regional Planning in China. New York, NY: Routledge.
 Sanyal, Bishwapriya, ed. 2005. Comparative Planning Cultures. New York: Routledge.
 Yu, Li. 2014. Chinese City and Regional Planning system. Surrey: Ashgate.
 Wu, Fulong, Jiang Xu, and Anthony G. O. Yeh. 2007. Urban Development in Post-Reform China: State,
Market, and Space. New York: Routledge.

Index #: 366
WHAT DO INFORMAL HOUSING MARKETS TEACH US ABOUT URBAN RESILIENCE AMIDST REFUGEE CRISES?
Abstract System ID#: 658
Individual Paper
FAWAZ, Mona [American University of Beirut] mf05@aub.edu.lb
Today’s estimated 11 million global refugee population raises important challenges for planning city and
regions, particularly in the Global South where the vast majority of these refugees are located. While
reconstruction and re-adaptation have become common themes in a planning discipline increasingly concerned
about “urban resilience” (Vale 2005), less attention has been given to protracted situations where millions of
refugees and internally displaced persons struggle to secure shelter and livelihoods in conditions usually depicted
as “temporary”, yet often extending indefinitely. The fact that most of these refugees settle in urban contexts
(e.g. Somali refugees in Nairobi, Khmer Krom, Rohingya, and Vietnamese refugees in Bangkok, or Syrian, Iraqi and
Palestinian refugees in Lebanon) where they sometimes form a sizable percentage of the local population (e.g.
more than 1 out of 4 people in Beirut today is a refugee) requires the planning discipline to converse with other
disciplines, particularly refugee studies, and to extend and adapt some of its methods to inform contemporary
policy responses to the ongoing urban refugee crisis.
In this paper, I argue that the research methods developed to study processes of housing production and
acquisition in low-income settlements (Jones and Ward 1994, Fawaz 2009), particularly those methods
investigating the workings of informal market mechanisms (e.g. circulation of information, housing products,
forms of agreement, prices, retaliation strategies) can be extended to investigate refugee shelter strategies and
their  impact on urban contexts. This approach can provide valuable insights for articulating shelter policy that
respond better to the needs of refugees while mitigating productively the negative side-effects of large refugee
influxes to urban settings.
To demonstrate my argument, I apply these methods to a case study in Beirut (Lebanon) where around 350,000
Syrian refugees have found shelter since 2012. I specifically document the transformation in one low-income
neighborhood where 300 housing units were surveyed to inquire about housing occupation and where 60
households (50 refugees, 10 Lebanese), three realtors and two public agents were interviewed. My findings
indicate, first, a highly responsive (and lucrative) informal housing market, which through the addition of floors
and the subdivision of existing units has increased its available housing stock several-fold over a period of
months. It further indicates that many parallels exist between processes of housing acquisition for low-income
Lebanese dwellers and Syrian refugees, particularly in the heavy reliance on social networks for accessing
information, securing contracts, and resisting evictions in cases of conflict. Not surprisingly, however, field
findings indicate that the very large influx of Syrian refugees has considerably reduced the quality of available
housing and precipitated a process of slum-lording where Lebanese families sublet their apartments through a
handful of local realtors while they leave to other venues. Findings further highlight the vulnerability of refugees
vis-à-vis these realtors and their decreasing negotiation/retaliation abilities as the neighborhood slides towards
becoming a de-facto camp where over 75% of dwellers are refugees (Fawaz et al, 2014). These findings suggest
policy responses towards integrated, neighborhood-upgrading type of interventions, that combine both physical
upgrading and institution building of the type advocated elsewhere for informal settlements (Fawaz 2009). These
findings are important for informing shelter response in large refugee crises. More generally, and in relation to
the contemporary planning theory, these findings widen current reflections on urban resilience to show
informality as a key asset when city need to adapt rapidly to new realities. They also nonetheless highlight the
types of vulnerabilities that may arise from relying on informal housing channels and draw our attention to the
need to mitigate them.
References
 Campbell, E. 2006. "Urban Refugees in Nairobi: Problems of Protection, Mechanisms of Survival, and
Possibilities of Integration." Journal of Refugee Studies 19(3): 396-413.
 Fawaz, M. 2009. “Contracts and Retaliation: Securing housing exchanges in the interstice of the
formal/informal Beirut (Lebanon) housing market”, Journal of Planning Education and Research.





Fawaz, M. and N. Saghieh. 2014. Rapid Housing, Land and Policy Assessment for the Syrian Refugee
Crisis in Lebanon. Report submitted to UNHCR, June 2014.
Jones, G. and P. Ward. 1994. Methodologies for Land and Housing Market Analysis. London: UCL Press.
Palmgren, P. 2013. Irregular Networks: Bangkok Refugees in the City and Region. Journal of Refugee
Studies Vol. 27, No. 1, pp. 21-41.

Abstract Index #: 367
IMPLEMENTING PARTICIPATORY PLANNING IN NITERóI, BRAZIL
Abstract System ID#: 679
Individual Paper
FRIENDLY, Abigail [University of Toronto] abigail.friendly@utoronto.ca
This paper will explore the importance of an institutionalized structure for public participation in Brazilian city
within a context of entrenched inequality and spatial segregation (Maricato, 2009). During the 1990s, several
Brazilian city experimented with progressive local planning derived from the urban reform movement and Brazil
became a laboratory for new approaches of local governance and participatory democracy (Fernandes, 2011).
The Statute of the City, approved in 2001 through broad participation of Brazil’s urban reform movements,
officially recognized the right to the city and aimed to promote social justice by alleviating the array of complex
problems faced by Brazilian city. Overall, the Statute recognized the social function of property – the regulation
of urban development as a public issue rather than as an individual or state interest – as a guiding principle. The
Statute mandates institutionalized participation in planning processes including citizen councils, large-scale
forums and public hearings.
In this paper, I explore the potential emancipatory role of participatory planning in the urban sphere in Niterói,
Rio de Janeiro State. By emancipatory, I mean the Statute’s requirement that city are required to do master
planning with broad-scale participation at all levels, which should (in theory) bring about widespread change and
social justice. In Brazil, one rationale for implementing participatory planning is to transform the exclusionary
urban order by incorporating a broad range of actors.
I explore two questions in this paper to understand the practice of the Statute’s participatory tools. First, to what
extent are the participatory requirements in Brazil's Statute allowing citizens to become involved in planning
processes? Second, what are the implications resulting from these new channels for citizen participation? I use
the concept of ‘participatory institutions’ to understand the participatory reforms implemented in Niterói
(Avritzer, 2009). This idea combines two schools of thought – citizen participation and the role of strong
institutions – both of which are applicable in Brazil where an institutional framework for participation has taken a
leading role. The paper deals with the experience of participation in Niterói, with Healey’s (2003: 110) proviso
that “process matters.” Despite problems with the practice of participation in Niterói, “participation takes place
within specially designed institutions… an outcome of institutions designed to promote participation” (Avritzer,
2009: 4). This paper is based on field work in the city Niterói in 2010-2011. The methodology is based on semistructured interviews, document analysis and observation at participatory meetings.
While a nuanced approach is necessary to understand the achievements in the area of participation, I show that a
gap exists between the rhetoric of the Statute and local practice. Middling practices of participation are often the
result, as I show in the case of the institutions of participation in Niterói. Yet despite the problems, the practice of
participation in the planning system is remarkable in Niterói, given the challenging context of Brazil as well as the
changes that have occurred in Brazilian urban policy and planning following the dictatorship. Overall, I argue that
not only is this embrace of participation innovative, but the fact that it is buttressed by an institutional system is
both meaningful and one from which other locales could learn. While there are challenges in the practice of such
participatory fora, without an institutional process for the participation of society in planning decisions, even
sincere commitments to participation may never amount to a process allowing for such decisions to be included.
Thus, strong institutions are critical in guaranteeing the right to the city in the sense of participation in a planning
system for all.

References
 Avritzer, L. (2009). Participatory Institutions in Democratic Brazil. Washington, D.C.: Woodrow Wilson
Center Press.
 Fernandes, E. (2011). "Implementing the Urban Reform Agenda in Brazil: Possibilities, Challenges, and
Lessons." Urban Forum 22(3): 229-314.
 Healey, P. (2003). "Collaborative Planning in Perspective." Planning Theory 2(2): 101-123.
 Maricato, E. (2009). "Fighting for Just city in Capitalism's Periphery." In P. Marcuse, J. Connolly, J. Novy,
I. Olivo, C. Potter & J. Steil (Eds.), Searching for the Just City: Debates in Urban Theory and Practice.
London: Routledge, pp. 194-213.

Abstract Index #: 368
RELOCATION OF DISASTER-PRONE INFORMAL SETTLEMENTS: DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITY OR
PERPETUATION OF POVERTY?
Abstract System ID#: 695
Individual Paper
CUADRA, Judith [Florida State University] jvc12@my.fsu.edu, presenting author, primary author
DILLING, Janet [Florida State University] jdilling@fsu.edu
If there is extensive literature on mechanisms for prediction and prevention of disasters in the urban context,
why do governments continue to struggle with losses in the same comminuty, disaster after disaster? Evidence
(Satterthwaite, 2011) shows that key to the issue is a lack of understanding of the processes by which human
settlements are established and the factors that encourage the population to remain in high-risk area. This
paper delves into the complexities of urban poor populations, housing projects, and natural disasters.
Governments and urban planners have not yet found a definite solution to the issue of safe, adequate, and
affordable housing for the urban poor; if any, new urban legislation has unintentionally aggravated the situation
of these populations (Sanderson, 2000).
More specifically, this paper discusses the implications of relocating urban poor families to “safe housing”
projects; which is even today, one of the most common yet controversial government “solutions” in the
developing world. Planning efforts to implement relocation without adequate consideration of the underlying
factors that create and sustain human settlements often leads to failure at implementation - the resistance of the
population to relocate or the abandonment of the new housing. The priority of the urban poor is daily survival,
therefore project beneficiaries frequently return to pre-relocation sites in search for economic opportunities
(Paine, 2002; Satterthwaite, 2011). Furthermore, if not planned consciously, relocation disrupts social networks
and support system that allow comminuty not only to survive but also to thrive psychologically as individuals.
In cases where there is no option but to remove urban poor comminuty from their neighborhood, such
interventions, combined with community participation, have yielded better solutions based on local knowledge
(Berke & Campanella, 2006; Cronin & Guthrie, 2011; Satterthwaite, 2011).
This study explores the benefits and dilemmas encountered during implementation of relocation program
designed to safeguard informal settlements from natural phenomena. It also aims to observe how participation
or the lack of it has influenced the results. The research questions are: 1) How do informal settlers and
government officials describe the relocation process designed to reduce disaster vulnerabilities? 2) What was the
extent of the community participation in the relocation project? Our case study design includes collection of
several forms of data from direct observations, interviews, and documents in the two selected relocation sites in
the Philippines and Nicaragua. We chose these two countries because they recently received increased attention
due to recurrent disasters and their governments showed a proactive attitude towards disaster management. On
this approach, a variety of data sources allowed us to triangulate the evidence and thus corroborate the findings.
Our findings are based on interviews and field work observations of a total of 16 informal settlers and 18
government officials and NGO representatives from Nicaragua and the Philippines. While this research is still on-

going, preliminary findings show that there is a complex array of circumstances that guide the observed
communities’ decision to locate and fight to remain on hazardous settlements. We found that these
circumstances are not irrational in nature but rather grounded in commonly ignored aspects of the urban poor’s
daily lives and struggles. We believe that inclusion of spaces to discuss such circumstances during the planning
process could help achieve better and sustainable results for comminuty, local governments, and practitioners
involved in relocation efforts.
References
 Berke, P. R., & Campanella, T. J. (2006). “Planning for post-disaster resiliency.” The Annals of the
American Academy of Political and Social Science, 604(1), 192-207.
 Cronin, V., & Guthrie, P. (2011). “Community-led resettlement: From a flood-affected slum to a new
society in Pune, India.” environment Hazards, 10(3-4), 310-326.
 Paine, R. (2002). “Danger and the no-risk thesis.” Culture and Catastrophe: the Anthropology of Disaster,
67-90.
 Sanderson, D. (2000). “Cities, disasters and livelihoods.” Environment and Urbanization, 12(2), 93-102.
 Satterthwaite, D. (2011). “What role for low-income comminuty in urban area in disaster risk
reduction?” Background Paper prepared for the 2011 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk
Reduction.

Abstract Index #: 369
THE CITY THROUGH THE EYES OF ITS MOST VULNERABLE: ORPHANED YOUTH’S DESIRES FOR NEIGHBORHOOD
CHANGE IN LUSAKA, ZAMBIA
Abstract System ID#: 746
Individual Paper
HARRIS, John [University of Oklahoma] johncharris@ou.edu
Urban theory and development strategies in Africa are often based on western assumptions about urban social
and economic development with little regard for local social and spatial organization. As a result, local
perspectives, particularly from society’s most vulnerable are often omitted, giving rise to accusations that African
urban development fosters spaces of exclusion rather than opportunity. The goal of this paper is to explore the
perspectives of vulnerable populations in urban Africa through original research with orphaned youth in Lusaka,
Zambia. It is estimated that out of a population of 16 million, 1 million in Zambia are orphaned children largely
cared for by extended family as a result of high incidents of HIV/AIDS mortality. For this population, particularly
those that live in low income or informal neighborhood of the city, opportunities in life are highly constrained.
This research engaged with members of this population through the use of photovoice, a participatory action
technique whereby participants share their perspectives of their physical surrounding through photography and
descriptive narrative, and focus group activities with a total of 50 individuals ages 14-18 years, including 18
individuals for photovoice and 32 for focus group activities in sessions of 8 each). The results present a unique
narrative about the way these vulnerable individuals perceive and interact with their neighborhood including
their desires and prescriptions for neighborhood change and their priorities for urban development. Lusaka has a
long history of informal settlement upgrading efforts including ongoing efforts to “regularize” existing
neighborhoods. These findings inform not only our theoretical understanding of African urban space, but also
provide inputs for urban policy including informal settlement upgrading priorities as well as the formal and
informal regulation of urban space.

Abstract Index #: 370
RESISTING, PERSISTING, DEMANDING: GRUPO DE MADRES OF BARRIO ITUZAINGó AND THE AGRICULTURAL
EXPANSION OF AN ABSENT STATE
Abstract System ID#: 751
Individual Paper

TORRADO, Marla [University of Texas at Austin] mjtorrad@gmail.com
This paper examines the paradoxical absence of the state in a landscape defined by centralized, regional
planning, focusing specifically on the social consequences of the rapid, state-sponsored expansion of genetically
modified (GM) soybean production in the province of Córdoba, Argentina. This province has seen significant
increases in the production and cultivation of soybean during the past 15 years, facilitated by national and
provincial planning strategies. It is now widely known throughout the scientific and academic community that the
production of GM soybean has led to environment pollution and serious health illnesses due to the high levels
of pesticides and chemicals the seed requires. Because of these health  impact of soybean production, various
protest groups have been formed. This paper focuses on the work of the Grupo de Madres de Barrio Ituzaingó
(referred to as Madres herein), a group of women in Ituzaingó, a small barrio in Córdoba. This group has worked
to make visible the negative effects of the expansion of soybean in their neighborhood, starting with the first
impacts noticed in the early 2000s: the death of friends and family due to agro-toxic illnesses, the increasing
cancer rates throughout their community, and pollution of their surrounding environment (Berger, 2013).
While other environment and community-based organizations have also been speaking up against this
industrial agro-production, the Madres have become nationally recognized for their efforts to, as they say, “take
care” of their children, families and neighbors because of their position as “mothers.” From the perspective of
the Madres, they have stepped into this role as “caretaker” because of the paradoxical absence of the state: even
though this agro-industrial landscape is a result of heavy regional planning intervention on the part of the
Argentine state and the province of Córdoba, the state is noticeably absent in terms of securing the health of its
citizens. This paradoxical absence of the state in a landscape shaped by regional planning has perpetuated
environmental degradation, health-related afflictions, community tensions and discontent, and community
isolation. As a result, community groups have stepped in to assume various roles of the state in what could be
understood as forms of radical or “insurgent” planning (Friedmann, 1987; Miraftab, 2009). In this particular case,
the Madres are drawing on gendered constructions of motherhood in their rhetorical strategies, as they seek
redress from the absent state to not only “take care” of their children and family, but also their entire
community.
This study draws on the conceptual network of political ecology (Peet, Robbins and Watts, 2011) in order to show
that the state-led planning strategies used to further soybean expansion, while directly harming populations in a
type of ‘silent’ and slow process of violence, also provides an opportunity for action, visibility and agency.
Additionally, by drawing on literature in radical and insurgent planning (Friedmann, 1987; Miraftab, 2009), the
case study highlights meanings of justice from the perspective of underrepresented groups as they struggle to
access spaces and assume roles normally fulfilled by the state, while also adding an important gender component
largely absent from the literature in insurgent and radical planning. Hence, the role of insurgent women is
brought to the forefront and further problematizes claims for justice in the context of hegemonic forms of
economic development and planning strategies, in particular industrial agriculture in the Global South (Sutton,
2010).
References
 Berger, M. 2013. Cuerpo, experiencia, narración: Autoorganización ciudadana en situaciones de
contaminación ambiental. Córdoba: Ediciones del Boulevard.
 Friedmann, J. 1987. Planning in the Public Domain. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
 Miraftab, F. 2009. Insurgent Planning: Situating Radical Planning in the Global South. Planning Theory,
8(1): 32-50.
 Peet, R., Robbins, P. and Watts, M. 2011. Global Political Ecology. New York: Routledge.
 Sutton, B. 2010. Bodies in Crisis: Culture, Violence, and Women’s Resistance in Neoliberal Argentina.
New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.

Abstract Index #: 371
AGENTS OF CHANGE? POLICY TRANSFER AGENTS AND THEIR ROLE IN POLICY LEARNING
Abstract System ID#: 780

Individual Paper
THOMAS, Alainna [University of California, Davis] acthomas@ucdavis.edu
Intensified globalization allows transnational planning networks to promote various urban_planning best practices
to a greater numbers of city around the world. These networks are comprised of organizations and individuals,
e.g. governmental and non-government -policy transfer agents. China’s rapid urbanization and rising personal car
use have spurred municipal leaders to seek out best practices to emerging issues of congestion, air pollution, and
traffic safety. This research brings attention to the dynamics between policy seekers and policy providers focusing
on two Chinese provincial capitals–Jinan, Shandong and Kunming, Yunnan. This empirical study relies upon
ethnographic methods including in-depth interviews, participant observations, and document analysis of urban
policies.
This study seeks to answer the question: What characteristics and conditions are necessary to be an effective
policy transfer agent? Although scholars assert that transfer agents play an important role in transnational
learning (Stone, 2004), scant research exists on what makes them effective. Findings point to three critical factors
in determining the extent of their influence: status of their organization, professional capacity of their
organization, and trust between policy transfer agents and their counterparts. In Kunming and Jinan, these
factors culminated to support or hinder the learning of Chinese municipal organizations. In addition, the transfer
agents influenced policy implementation. These findings provide for a greater understanding of the overall
transnational learning process, the role of transfer agents in influencing the process, and limits to transnational
learning. Through this work provides a more comprehensive understanding of the politics surrounding policy
transfer and dismantles assumptions of top-down governance.
References
 Stone, D. (2004). Transfer agents and global networks in the ‘transnationalization’ of policy. Journal of
European Public Policy, 11(3), 545-566.
 Healey, P., & Upton, R. (Eds.). (2010). Crossing Borders: International Exchange and Planning Practices.
Oxford: Routledge.
 Dolowitz, D. P., & Marsh, D. (1996). Who Learns What from Whom: a Review of the Policy Transfer
Literature. Political Studies (XLIV), 343-357.
 Dolowitz, D., & Medearis, D. (2009). Considerations of the obstacles and opportunities to formalizing
cross-national policy transfer to the United States: a case study of the transfer of urban environment
and planning policy from Germany. Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy, 27, 684-697.
 Marsden, G., & Stead, D. (2011). Policy transfer and learning in the field of transport: A review of
concepts and evidence. transportation Policy, 18, 482-500.

Abstract Index #: 372
RECUPERATING THE PUBLIC: THE CHANGING POLITICS OF PROPERTY AND SQUATTING IN POST-CRASH MADRID
Abstract System ID#: 792
Pre-organized Session: The Politics of Making and Re-making: Transnationalism, Circulation and the Emergent in
Urban and Community Development
GONICK, Sophie [University of California, Berkeley] gonick@berkeley.edu
Can squatting become a viable housing alternative, particularly in a culture in which property is a sacrosanct
component of both economic development and social reproduction? Since the onset of the crisis in Spain,
thousands of families have experienced foreclosure and eviction. Induced to participate in the ebullient property
market of a boom-time economy reliant on urban speculation, these households now face uncertain futures of
increasing vulnerability and socio-spatial inequality. Such conditions are exacerbated by the retreat of the welfare
state; austerity edicts have demanded privatization and the demolition of public program and services, including
the already scant provisions of social housing. At the same time, the country is literally littered with empty
housing stock: some new estates turn to ruin as they lie fallow, while older units are hollowed by dispossession.

In response, the Plataforma de Afectados por la Hipoteca (PAH-Mortgage Victims’ Platform) has not only
contested the effects of risky credit products and an unjust mortgage system, but also called into question the
state’s capacity to govern in the face of such stark contrast.
Within these contestations, squatting has emerged as both strategic political tactic and equitable housing
solution, gaining prevalence as a means to shelter the growing ranks of the urban poor. The re-emergence of
needs-based squatting, however, is a surprising trend because of historical policy and attitudes towards private
property, which has long been a central component to both urban economic development and social
reproduction, made inviolate by both ideology and law. Looking to housing struggles in Madrid, I argue the scalar
effects of austerity have reconfigured everyday citizens’ relationship to property and housing. As banks receive
taxpayer bailouts, they continue to evict people, selling off empty units to international investment funds.
Multinational EU mandates, national policy, and municipal debt conspire to unduly prejudice the domestic
spaces of people suffering through unemployment and financial ruin. In light of the punitive effects of such an
arrangement, people have turned to squatting as a means of not only housing themselves, but also claiming
these spaces as inherently public. In the process, they vindicate the social function of housing over its use as
investment tool.
In this presentation, I will draw on a year and a half of qualitative fieldwork. Relying on in-depth interviews,
extensive participant observation, archival documents, and contemporary media, I argue people’s attitudes
towards property have fundamentally changed in the six short years since the crisis began. I reveal how this shift
has occurred through an emergent spatial common sense that privileges questions of justice and egalitarianism
over consumption and the marketplace, in which housing is a key site for the articulation of alternative politics.
Ultimately, this presentation will seek to inflect existing literature on squatting and urban informality. Within the
North Atlantic, squatting is often read as an ideologically motivated political act, linked to autonomous
geographies of protest (Pickerill and Chatterton 2006; A. Martínez 2014). However, scholars working in the Global
South call our attention to the ways in which urban informality is a common condition throughout contemporary
city spaces, both as a tactic of the poor and as a more prevalent spatial logic (see for example: Roy and AlSayyad
2004; Yiftachel 2009). Through the case of squatting in Madrid, I reveal how changing property relations have
contributed to new articulations of informality that destabilize traditional binaries of Global North and South. In
disrupting these accepted categories of geographic thought, I argue housing is a crucial site for the construction
of alternative politics within a moment of European protest.
References
 Martínez, Miguel. 2014. “How Do Squatters Deal with the State? Legalization and Anomalous
Institutionalization in Madrid.” International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 38 (2): 646–74.
 López, Isidro, and Emmanuel Rodríguez. 2011. “The Spanish Model.” New Left Review, II, , no. 69 (June):
5–29.
 Pickerill, Jenny, and Paul Chatterton. 2006. “Notes towards Autonomous Geographies: Creation,
Resistance and Self-Management as Survival Tactics.” Progress in Human Geography 30 (6): 730–46.
 Roy, Ananya, and Nezar AlSayyad. 2004. Urban Informality: Transnational Perspectives from the Middle
East, Latin America, and South Asia. Lanham, Md.; Berkeley, Calif.: Lexington Books ; Center for Middle
Eastern Studies, University of California at Berkeley.
 Yiftachel, Oren. 2009. “Critical Theory and ‘gray Space’: Mobilization of the Colonized.” City 13 (2-3):
246–63.

Abstract Index #: 373
CYCLING FOR VISIBILITY IN QUITO, ECUADOR: MULTI-SITUATED ACTORS AND AGENDAS IN PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 840
Pre-organized Session: The Politics of Making and Re-making: Transnationalism, Circulation and the Emergent in
Urban and Community Development
GAMBLE, Julie [University of California, Berkeley] jcgamble@berkeley.edu

Can cycling, as both a social and planning response, challenge trends in car dependence? In recent years,
bicycling has proliferated in city across the globe as a response to the perverse and continued dominance of the
automobile. Transnational planning ideas such as public bike share system encourage cycling as a mode of
public transit and help reactivate public space. These efforts have resulted in an incongruent transit vision of the
city, where bicycles attempt to humanize the city and increased automobile congestion and persistent building of
super freeways continue to impact the daily lives of people moving around.
In particular, Latin American city have widely adopted and implemented bike lanes; open street program, and
worked with international transit research institutes like Embarq or the Institute for Transportation and
Development Policy (ITDP) to reconfigure transit goals in the city for people. Yet, these transformations have
simultaneously taken place because of urban cycling movements, where a plurality of groups and actors outside
of recognized municipal institutions have influenced the execution of bicycle infrastructure. This operates lateral
to a confluence of regional experiments in mobility practices, increased traffic, and fragmentation due to
privatized toll-ways across the Latin America region.
In this context, this paper explores the relationship between cyclists, transnational networks, and planning
institutions in Quito, Ecuador. It uncovers how urban cyclists in Quito have reoriented bicycle-planning outcomes
by working with international activists and organizations, as well as local institutions. Through these channels, the
paper argues that daily spatial practices of cyclists have resulted in programmatic and policy-oriented planning
outcomes that impede on the urban space of the automobile.
Based on on 16 months of fieldwork, this paper draws on qualitative and participatory research data, to
illuminate how cyclists in Quito have changed the planning process through daily practices of moving around,
activism, and working directly with local bicycle planners through the rhetoric of international expertise. It
argues that efforts of cyclists make visible how citizens affirm their rights to the city while instigating new
planning approaches that are needs-based. This work demonstrates how alternative practices can directly impact
policy and practice in a global planning context.
References
 Borsdorf, A., Hidalgo, R., 2008. New dimensions of social exclusion in Latin America: From gated
communities to gated city, the case of Santiago de Chile.  land_use Policy 25, 153–160.
doi:10.1016/j.land_usepol.2007.04.001
 Brand, P., Dávila, J.D., 2011. Mobility innovation at the urban margins. City 15, 647–661.
doi:10.1080/13604813.2011.609007
 Caldeira, T.P.R., 2012. Imprinting and Moving Around: New Visibilities and Configurations of Public Space
in São Paulo. Public Culture 24, 385–419. doi:10.1215/08992363-1535543
 Scott, N.A., 2013. Like a Fish Needs a Bicycle Henri Lefebvre and the Liberation of Transportation. Space
and Culture 16, 397–410. doi:10.1177/1206331213487062

Abstract Index #: 374
ON PLANNING AND THE SPATIAL TURN IN DEVELOPMENT IN THE GLOBAL SOUTH
Abstract System ID#: 851
Individual Paper
BOU AKAR, Hiba [Hampshire College] hbouakar@hampshire.edu
There is not much consensus on what development and planning mean and how to understand the relationship
between these two bodies of knowledge and practices as they relate to ordering territories. A brief survey of the
planning literature specifically shows how the relationship between the two fields has rarely been clarified (Hart
2001, Robinson 2004, Roy 2002, Verdeil 2004, Yiftachel 1989). This intertwining of not only discourses but also
practices has been exacerbated by the fact that academic circles within the planning field (and the development
field), for example, do not agree on how to define, theorize, and practice planning. This also highlights the rift

between what planning and planning mean in the Global North versus the Global South (Robinson 2004). This
paper aims to explore this tenuous relationship between planning and development by examining their
relationship in shaping the built environment in Lebanon in the 1950s-1990s, including the civil war years (19751990). The paper traces the knowledge production that circulated among planning and development experts over
time, focusing on the changing relationship between the two fields and its role in shaping the uneven
development of Beirut’s peripheries. This paper shows how from the 1950s-1980s development talk provided the
contours within which urban_planning thought and practice evolved in the city even during years of war. The
paper then illustrates how planning practice in the 1990s after the end of the civil war was divorced — for the
most part — from its task and hopes of development. The paper examines this spatial turn in development
practice in Lebanon within a critical global moment characterized by neoliberalization and the end of the Cold
War, and investigates the implications of this shift on the spatial production of Beirut’s territories of poverty. This
shift in the approach of planning from the quests and questions of development centered on issues of poverty to
an exercise in spatializing sectarian difference changed the discourse around Beirut’s southern peripheries from
that of informal and poor peripheries to sectarian frontiers. The paper shows how this reformulation of the
political consciousness vis-à-vis the periphery, its economy, marginality, and inhabitants has had major
repercussions on poverty, segregation, violence, and environment degradation. Learning from Beirut, this paper
also aims to contribute to the larger discussion on what urban_planning has come to mean over time and the
material and social implications of planning practice in post-colonial city.
References
 Beauregard, Robert A. 2001. “The Multiplicities of Planning.” Journal of Planning Education and Research
20 (4): 437–39.
 Hart, Gillian. 2001. “Development Critiques in the 1990s: Culs de Sac and Promising Paths.” Progress in
Human Geography 25 (4): 649–58.
 Roy, Ananya. 2002. City Requiem, Calcutta: Gender and the Politics of Poverty. Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press.
 Robinson, Jenny. 2004. Ordinary city: Between Modernity and Development. London: Routledge.
 Verdeil, Eric. 2004. Methodological and Political Issues in the Lebanese Planning Experiences. In City
Debates 2003: The Lebanese National Master Plan, edited by M. Harb. American Univeristy of Beirut,
Beirut, Lebanon.

Abstract Index #: 375
EXAMINING THE ROLE OF NEOLIBERALIZED PLANNING IN AUGMENTATION OF URBAN CONFLICT
Abstract System ID#: 868
Individual Paper
MOHAMMADZADEH, Mohsen [Auckland Council] mmohamadzadeh1978@yahoo.com
In recent years, attention has been drawn to the fact that neoliberalism has significantly exacerbated urban
conflict by increasing socioeconomic inequality. In fact, as idea that global capitalism could, or will, eventually
solve urban issues such as socioeconomic contradictions seem increasingly unrealistic, some suggest that both
central and local government should play the main role in mitigation of contradictions via reformed planning
(Watson 2009). In politics and planning, some scholars rightly perceive urban conflict as a constitutive element of
socio-political relations that is imperative for socio-political transformations. From this perspective, planning
should provide adequate conditions under which antagonism as a destructive social phenomena change into
agonism as a transformative potential (Hillier 2003, Pløger 2004). This paper will explain why neoliberalized
planning is ontologically impotent to mitigate, or transform, urban contradictions and its symptoms such as
antagonistic behavior. Conversely, the market-oriented plans and policy exacerbate antagonism in late
capitalism. To develop this argument, the author will address how neoliberalism has reshaped welfare state into
entrepreneurial state to operate effectively within the global market. Since plans and policy generally attain
their legitimacy from central or local governments, the transformation of state apparatus has subsequently
influenced planning and its functions.

From Deleuze and Guattari’s perspective, the operation of the economic growth is the main objective of the
capitalistic city. The growth largely relies on the constant flows of capital and non-capital (Deleuze & Guattari
1972). Thus, a capitalistic city competes with other capitalistic city to attract the flows for its economic growth.
Based on critical theories, the paper will reveal that the entrepreneurial state has largely deployed urban plans
and projects as part of the city marketing. The neoliberal plans and policy promise, or fantasize, further capital
surplus and enjoyment to their residents, international investors and immigrants. The deployment of ‘society of
commanded enjoyment’ will assist to examine the role of neoliberalised planning in augmentation of
socioeconomic contradictions in late capitalism (McGowan 2012). The paper will explain why these marketoriented plans are inherently unable to materialize their promises at least for the large number of their residents
and new arrivals.
The paper will study Dubai and its development to show that how the implementation of market-oriented plans
generates urban conflict. Dubai is generally recognized as a neoliberal utopia that has been instantly shaped
based on the market values. Massive urban projects such as Burj Al-Khalifa, Burj Al-Arab, and Palm Islands have
shaped Dubai’s brand around the world. Dubai with its luxurious hotels, gigantic shopping males, and theme
parks promises advance enjoyment to its residents and visitors. In addition, Dubai is the primary trade hub in the
Middle East region, the implementation of market oriented urban development polices combined with the taxfree policy promises high capital gain to international investors. Based on several interviews, this paper will argue
that the neoliberal development creates discontents among its Arab residents and foreign labors in Dubai. In
conclusion, this paper argues that the reformation of planning cannot singly mitigate urban conflict and its
symptoms, but the reformation should be considered as part of replacement of the hegemonic ideology.
References
 Deleuze, G., and Guattari, F. (1972). AntiOedipus, Minnesota.
 Hillier, J. (2003). Agonizing over consensus: Why Habermasian Ideals cannot be Real. Planning Theory,
2(1): 37-59.
 Pløger, J. (2004). Strife: urban_planning and agonism. Planning Theory, 3(1): 71-92.
 McGowan, T. (2012). The End of dissatisfaction?: Jacques Lacan and the emerging society of enjoyment.
Suny Press.
 Watson, V. (2009). ‘The planned city sweeps the poor away…’: urban_planning and 21st century
urbanization. Progress in Planning, 72(3): 151-193.

Abstract Index #: 376
"CONTROL THE SOUTH": THE SPATIAL LOGIC OF DEVELOPMENT PLANNING IN URUMQI, XINJIANG BEFORE AND
AFTER THE "7-5" RIOTS
Abstract System ID#: 909
Individual Paper
HANSEN, Lauren [Cornell University] lfh28@cornell.edu
In the years since the Urumqi Riots of July 2009, both international and domestic media have chronicled the
conspicuous militarization of the city’s public spaces and the expansive scope of an oppressive security apparatus
charged with preventing ethnic conflict. In contrast, there has been little examination of the ways in which these
riots affected profound changes in urban plans designed to engineer, if not ‘ethnic unity,’ then at least a future
free of violent ethnic conflict. In this paper, I ask: in what ways do the post-2009 revisions to the city’s master
plan and subsequent shifts in development priorities and land-use policy reflect the ways in which Urumqi’s
local government has revised its answer to the so-called ‘ethnic question’ (minzu wenti)? With data gathered
from interviews with planning officials and real estate developers as well as a comparative analysis of the city’s
1999 and 2010 master plans and related documents, I argue that changing emphases within development
planning – and particularly the post-riot policy of ‘Control the South, Expand the North’ (nan kong, bei kuo) – are
designed to not only rework Han-Uyghur relations, but also intra-ethnic relations among Uyghurs. Specifically,
the municipal government intends to challenge the traditional ‘us-them’ ethnic divisions in Urumqi by

discouraging the growth of a distinct middle-class Uyghur lifestyle and instead selling the Chinese middle-class
lifestyle to those Uyghurs willing and able to buy into it.

Abstract Index #: 377
INTERDISCIPLINARY SERVICE LEARNING AND THE CHALLENGE OF REPRESENTATION: STORIES OF STUDIO
PEDAGOGY IN INFORMAL SETTLEMENTS IN SANTO DOMINGO, DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Abstract System ID#: 915
Pre-organized Session: Beyond Boilerplate Participatory Planning: Notes from the Field
SLETTO, Bjorn [University of Texas] bjornsletto@mail.utexas.edu
Service-learning in informal settlements in the Global South faces particular challenges in terms of uneven
relations of power and epistemological contradictions, especially when working in contested landscapes shaped
by multi-scalar and historically contingent structures and processes. In particular, such power-laden social
contexts present profound challenges in terms of visual and textual representation. A premium is often placed on
the development of reports, plans, maps, and the like in service-learning pedagogy, in part because of the
demands on instructors to deliver “products” to complex array of partners and audiences that often have
contradictory expectations and requirements. Working in such fraught, even conflictual situations, when time is
at a premium, funding is limited, and epistemological contradictions complicate decision-making in terms of
design, data analysis, and textual production, critical reflections of the social and political implications of
representations may give way to disciplinary norms associated with empirical measures of accuracy, legibility,
and precision. In the case of service-learning pedagogy in informal settlements in Santo Domingo, Dominican
Republic, four groups of students have conducted participatory research and plan-making to address
infrastructure and solid waste management challenges in partnership with neighborhood organizations, civil
society partners, and government agents. This work has resulted in an extensive production of visual and textual
representations as well as video aimed at furthering capacities of residents, assisting in the development of
community-based projects, and prompting engagement on the part of previously absent government agents and
civil society organizations. The explicitly political approach to these service-learning projects, informed by work in
radical and insurgent planning (Friedmann 1987, Holston 1995, Miraftab 2009) has prompted interdisciplinary
pedagogical strategies to further critical reflexivity among students and project partners, including critical
awareness of the rhetorical and social dimensions of students’ representation. The goal has been to foreground
and critically assess the potential implications of students’ representations in the context of politically fraught
and often disempowering discourses of informality and development, which has led to a reconceptualization of
the “products” of service-learning pedagogy as unstable stories of engagement (Sandercock 2003) that are
always subject to affective and unpredictable re-telling and reframing.
References
 Friedmann, John. 1987. Planning in the Public Domain: From Knowledge to Action. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
 Holston, James. 1995. Spaces of insurgent citizenship. Planning Theory 13: 35-52.
 Miraftab, Farana. 2009. Insurgent planning: Situating radical planning in the Global South. Planning
Theory 8(1): 32–50.
 Leonie, Sandercock. 2003. Out of the closet: The importance of stories and storytelling in planning
practice. Planning Theory and Practice 4 (1): 11-28.

Abstract Index #: 378
SPATIAL ETHNOGRAPHY AND CRITICAL CARTOGRAPHY: NEXT-BEST ALTERNATIVES TO PARTICIPATORY
PLANNING?
Abstract System ID#: 942
Pre-organized Session: Beyond Boilerplate Participatory Planning: Notes from the Field
KIM, Annette [University of Southern California] annettek@usc.edu

With the growth of Web 2.0, open source GIS, and Google maps, participatory mapping projects have grown
considerably in the last decade. Community asset mapping, collaborative mapping, etc. have become a more
common practice in planning as a way to make legible the views and aspirations of local constituencies, with the
important potential to present their own knowledge claims to urban_planning institutions (Kretzmann and
McKnight 1993). However, other have noted that the participatory nature of these projects are suspect since
they are usually initiated by outsiders and fizzle when the external funding ends (Ghose and Elwood 2003) and
that they may not engender deep and empowering engagement (Ghose 2007).
But, the predominant focus on participatory mapping as the mode of critical mapping has obscured another line
of inquiry not yet explored: might there be strategies of emancipatory visualization other than the participatory?
This provocative question is posed not to devalue local knowledge and self-determination. Indeed, the point is
that obtaining these may need a wider arsenal of strategies than the modes we currently employ.
One of the obvious reasons for needing other modalities of critical cartography is when working in undemocratic
places with non-participatory planning institutions. This paper presents two critical cartography projects that the
author undertook: mapping street vendors on the sidewalks of Ho Chi Minh City (Kim 2015) and mapping the
subterranean migrant housing market in Beijing. In both Vietnam and China, citizens cannot hold meetings
without approval, state representatives govern at the neighborhood level, the press is state-owned, and city
plans are designed by experts. This paper considers the use of spatial ethnography and directed collaboration as
an alternative to participatory mapping, both its potential and limitations, as well as consider the experience of
teaching these methods to Vietnamese and Chinese college students.
References
 Ghose, Rina. 2007. "Politics of Scale and Networks of Association in PPGIS." Environment and Planning A
39:1961-1980.
 Ghose, Rina, and Sarah Elwood. 2003. "Public Participation GIS and Local Political Context: Propositions
and Research Directions." URISA Journal 15:17-24.
 Kim, Annette M. 2015. Sidewalk City: Remapping Public Space in Ho Chi Minh City. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
 Kretzmann, John P., and John L. McKnight. 1993. Building comminuty from the Inside Out: a Path
Toward Finding and Mobilizing a Community's Assets. Chicago: ACTA Publications.

Abstract Index #: 379
FLOODING AND URBAN POLITICS IN ASIAN COASTAL MEGACITIES
Abstract System ID#: 949
Individual Paper
SHATKIN, Gavin [Northeastern University] g.shatkin@neu.edu
Recent research has found that 15 of the 20 city that will experience the greatest increase in populations
vulnerable to chronic flooding as a consequence of sea level rise by 2070 are in Asia (Hanson et al 2011). The
threat of sea level rise will only further increase the probability of devastating floods that are already causing
widespread damage and displacement in many coastal city. Floods causing severe loss of life and property
damage hit Jakarta in 2007 and 2013, Bangkok in 2011, Manila in 2009, and Mumbai in 2005, to name but a few
examples. While a substantial amount of research has explored the implications of climate change and sea level
rise for flooding, and for the potential permanent inundation of significant parts of Asian coastal megacities,
examinations of the new political pressures created by climate change and increasing hazard exposure have been
relatively rare. This paper will develop a theoretical framework for examining the implications of chronic flooding
for urban politics in Asia. It poses the following questions: How is flooding, and the threat of climate change
induced inundation, reshaping the terrain of urban political power and contestation in Asian coastal city?
Specifically, what pressures are state actors facing to rescale and reconstitute their action in the face of climate
change induced hazards, to confront mounting pressures and threats both from vulnerable comminuty and

from much larger regional and watershed scale forces of change? The paper does addresses these questions
through a review of literature on hazards and urban politics in Asian coastal city.
In focusing on the question of the scales of state action, the paper also seeks to inform debates on the rescaling
of the state in the current era of increased global economic interconnectivity. Brenner (2003) has argued that, in
the context of growing global economic competition and neoliberalization of policy, state actors have increasingly
focused on city and urban regions as key scales for capital accumulation. As a consequence city have become
“geographical targets for a variety of far-reaching institutional changes and policy-realignments designed to
enhance local economic growth capacities” (Brenner 2004:3). These growth-driven pressures elicit a national
state focus on reforms in governance aimed at fostering entrepreneurialism in city government, and a focus in
infrastructural investment on shaping metropolitan regions as magnets for corporate investment. Yet the threats
of chronic flooding and climate change induced inundation place a very different set of demands on governments
than those dictated by this more limited and entrepreneurially focused agenda. They call for massive state
infrastructural investment and regulatory interventions at the scale of watersheds, while also calling for new
modes of interacting with vulnerable comminuty at the grassroots. Hence a central hypothesis explored in this
paper is that chronic flooding and the threat of permanent inundation is creating new sites of political conflict
that have the potential to force a fundamental rescaling of state action.
References
 Hanson, S., R. Nicholls, N. Ranger, S. Hallegatte, J. Corfee-Morlot, C. Herweijer, and J. Chateau. 2011. “A
Global Ranking of Port city with High Exposure to Climate Extremes.” Climatic Change 104 (1): 89–111.
 Brenner, N. 2003. New State Spaces: Urban Governance and the Rescaling of Statehood. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
 Pelling, M., and S. Blackburn. 2013. “Case Studies: Governing Social and environment Transformation
in Coastal Megacities,” In M. Pelling and S. Blackburn eds. Megacities and the Coast: Risk, Resilience, and
Tranformation, London: Earthscan, pp. 200-236.

Abstract Index #: 380
THE IMPACT OF LAND VALUES ON COMMUNITY LOANS FOR HOUSING: THE CASE OF MANILA
Abstract System ID#: 967
Individual Paper
CRANE, Rebecca [University of California, Los Angeles] Rebecca.E.Crane@gmail.com
Over the past fifty years, the Philippines has been experiencing rapid urbanization. Formal housing development
and service provision have been unable to keep pace with the population growth, and around a third of Metro
Manila’s population has found alternative living situations in slums and informal settlements (Ballesteros, 2010).
Past housing strategies have had limited success. Recognizing the serious need for more housing, the Philippine
government set a goal for itself: from 2011 until 2016, it would provide 1.47 million units of housing through
direct assistance, and a large part of this through community-based lending and redevelopment program. While
some portion of these people are being resettled to less environmently and geographically vulnerable area,
the government has committed to enabling the majority of these informal settlers to remain in their current
locations. But given the rising values of land in Metro Manila, the cost of the in-situ approaches is higher than the
resettlement alternatives. The question remains that if these costs are transferred to the predominantly poor
settlers on the land (Mukhija, 2002), will they be able to afford the upgrading process?
Since 1988, the Philippine government has been financing a Community Mortgage Program in order to provide
communities living on untenured land with loans to purchase the land. A 2004 analysis of the program found that
successful repayment was dependent on the degree to which the community was organized prior to receiving the
loan (Ballesteros & Vertido, 2004). My study integrates the quantitative research into the Community Mortgage
Program done in this studya with a spatial analysis of land values. By adding this geographical element into the
study, I determine how differing land values factor into the success or failure of community loans. I complement
this work with qualitative research in the form of a series of interviews with community members receiving the

loans, as well as staff at nonprofit organizations and national housing agencies working with the comminuty on
these program.
References
 Ballesteros, M. M. (2010). Linking Poverty and the Environment: Evidence from Slums in Philippine city
(Discussion Paper Series No. 2010-33) (p. 31). Philippines: Philippine Institute for Development Studies.
 Ballesteros, M. M., & Vertido, D. C. (2004). Can group credit work for housing loans? Some evidence
from the CMP (Policy Notes). Philippine Institute for Development Studies.
 Monkkonen, P. (2013). Urban land-use regulations and housing markets in developing countries:
Evidence from Indonesia on the importance of enforcement.  land_use Policy, 34, 255–264.
doi:10.1016/j.land_usepol.2013.03.015
 Mukhija, V. (2002). An analytical framework for urban upgrading: property rights, property values and
physical attributes. Habitat International, 26(4), 553–570. doi:10.1016/S0197-3975(02)00019-X

Abstract Index #: 381
FROM MISSING LINK TO A MISSED OPPORTUNITY: COMMUNITY-BASED ORGANIZATIONS IN URBAN
UPGRADING IN INDONESIA
Abstract System ID#: 969
Individual Paper
DAS, Ashok [University of Hawaii at Manoa] ashokdas@hawaii.edu
Community-driven development (CDD) program (Mansuri & Rao 2004, 2013) in developing countries, facilitated
by neoliberalism (Craig & Porter 2006) and decentralization (Beard, Miraftab & Silver, 2008), project communitybased organizations (CBOs) as key interlocutors (de Wit & Berner 2009) in new, participatory institutional
arrangements for urban_planning and poverty alleviation (Satterthwaite & Mitlin 2014). Yet, scant research
(Douglass 1992), compared to that on NGOs in developing countries, explains why the capacity and effectiveness
of CBOs vary in urban upgrading, especially within the same program. By focusing on CBOs created exclusively to
implement the Comprehensive Kampung Improvement Project (CKIP) – a local urban upgrading effort – in
Surabaya, Indonesia, this paper’s objectives are twofold: 1) explain impediments posed by pre-existing local
institutional arrangements in the path of creating empowered CBOs; and 2) clarify how CBOs’ organizational and
management characteristics – composition, human resources, representation, decision-making processes, etc. –
impact their ability to manage community-based microfinance funds, thereby causing divergent outcomes. Rich
qualitative data acquired over nearly a decade of longitudinal research in Surabayan comminuty, including a
survey of 65 CKIP CBOs, allow for a mixed-methods analysis that yields multiple insights. The findings are not just
instructive for Surabaya’s own future efforts; they also further our understanding (UN-Habitat 2001) of essential
aspects of institutional arrangements and program design that developing city’ planners, more generally, ought
to consider whilst embarking on CBO-led microfinance/upgrading for greater inclusivity and sustainability.
References
 Beard, V. A., Miraftab, F., & Silver, C. (Eds.). (2008). Planning and decentralization: contested spaces for
public action in the global south. London ; New York: Routledge.
 Craig, D., & Porter, D. (2006). Development beyond neoliberalism?: governance, poverty reduction, and
political economy. Abingdon, Oxon; New York: Routledge.
 de Wit, J., & Berner, E. (2009). Progressive Patronage? Municipalities, NGOs, CBOs and the Limits to
Slum Dwellers’ Empowerment. Development and Change, 40(5), 927–947.
 Mansuri, G., & Rao, V. (2013). Localizing development: does participation work?. Washington, D.C:
World Bank.
 Satterthwaite, D., & Mitlin, D. (2014). Reducing urban poverty in the global South. London ; New York:
Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 382
CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECT CONTINUITY: SURVIVORS IN THE VOLATILE MEXICAN CONTEXT
Abstract System ID#: 977
Individual Paper
MONTGOMERY, Brittany [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] bnmont@mit.edu
In Latin America, the last forty years of fiscal and political turbulence have contributed to an “infrastructure gap”.
Yet anecdotes of capital investments in critical infrastructure that remain unfinished following a transition of
political power are common. This case study of the Metropolitan Zone of Guadalajara, Mexico uses process
tracing to investigate the factors that contribute to the continuity of metropolitan-scale infrastructure
implementation across political administrations in the water/sanitation and transportation sectors. Thirty-two
interviews with stakeholders from multiple public administrations, NGOs, and the private sector, as well as
legislative and project finance documents, state budget and construction payment records, and reports from
local civic organizations, were consulted to construct a portfolio of projects ripe for continuity by the current
administration. Using these materials, this case study also explores the barriers to and contributing factors of
continuity across the most recent political transition. National environment rules and project finance, a
requirement for financial obtaining support from the national infrastructure fund, directly resulted in the
continuity of the two projects that weathered the most recent changes in state government administration.
Weak evidence of clientelism also underpins the continuity of the two surviving projects.
Despite the continuation of two projects following the 2013 gubernatorial transition, the trans-administration
continuity of future capital investments in critical infrastructure is threatened by significant formal and informal
barriers. Ad hoc capital investment budgeting and prioritization, limited mechanisms for multiyear budgeting,
and the persistence of the legal practice of preventive jailing, when fused with the legacies of fiscal volatility,
embedded fear of authoritarian control, and the culturally-ingrained notion of impropriety associated with
administration-spanning projects, will continue to affect capital investment continuity in Mexico. Filling the
critical “infrastructure gap” in Mexico, as well as in other Latin American countries with similar political and
economic histories, depends on the consideration of these constraints to capital investment continuity.
References
 Easterly, William, and Luis Servén. The Limits of Stabilization : Infrastructure, Public Deficits and Growth
in Latin America / Edited by William Easterly and Luis Servén. Latin American Development Forum.
Stanford, Calif. : Stanford Social Sciences ; Washington, DC : World Bank, c2003., 2003.
 Calderón, César, and Luis Servén. “Infrastructure in Latin America.” World Bank Policy Research Working
Paper Series, no. 5317 (2010). https://openknowledge.worldbank.com/handle/10986/3801.
 North, Douglass C. Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1990.
 Briceno-Garmendia, Cecilia, and Antonio Estache. “Infrastructure Services in Developing Countries:
Access, Quality, Costs, and Policy Reform.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series, no. 3468
(2004).

Abstract Index #: 383
WHAT IT MEANS TO LOSE ACCESS TO PUBLIC LAND: URBANIZATION, PUBLICLY PROVIDED FARMLAND, AND
POVERTY IN INDONESIA
Abstract System ID#: 997
Individual Paper
GAMAL, Ahmad [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] gamal1@illinois.edu
In this research I test the hypothesis that peasant households’ loss of access to productive farm lands creates a
lag in the short and medium term reduction of poverty incidence in rapidly urbanizing rural area. Using an
extensive data of more than 7,000 households from four waves of the Indonesian Family Life Survey (IFLS 1993,

1997, 2000, 2007), I evaluate whether households who lost access to publicly/communally provided farm lands
experience significantly greater reduction in their incomes and expenditures from similarly situated agricultural
households. I then assess whether short term lag in poverty reduction at the regional level can be attributed to
such income reductions experienced by peasant agricultural households.
Recent empirical research has been predominantly supportive to the policy of promoting urbanization in rural
areas and secondary towns. Urbanization of rural area has been said to lead to: the diversification of the rural
economy; local transition from agriculture to nonfarm production, and consequently; faster poverty reduction
(e.g. Christiaensen 2013, Christiaensen & Todo 2014). However, it has been predicted that a majority of poor
people in developing countries will still live in rural area long after most of the population urbanize (Ravallion
2001).
Most of research on this topic has applied either the lens of human geography or economics to investigate the
processes of urbanization. From those perspectives, urbanization is operationally defined as (1) locational shift,
the increasing proportion of the urban population through migration channels, or; (2) sectoral upgrading,
changes in the regional industrial structure, from predominantly agricultural into manufacturing. Very few
research, if any, has applied the environment geography lens, which perceives urbanization as a change to the
physical landscape of predominantly rural area. As the rural agricultural economy shifts to manufacturing, the
rural environment simultaneously experiences extensive  land_use conversion from farmlands to industrial,
commercial, and residential functions.
Many landless peasant households in developing countries depend on publicly or communally provided lands for
their agricultural production. When these farmlands are converted, peasant agricultural households will suddenly
lose access to productive farm lands. It often leads to involuntary displacement of farm labors from their jobs and
sudden shock in peasant households’ income. This phenomenon have received very little attention because
established literatures in development economics tend to focus more on the long-term impact of structural
changes in the economy. On the other hand, while the social costs of such structural change, i.e. job and income
loss, occur in the short and medium terms, they can bring long-term negative consequences to the welfare of
affected households. This research emphasizes on the importance of doing impact analysis of urban and regional
development policy at the household level, in addition to the common economic analysis at the regional level.
References
 Christiaensen, L. & Todo, Y. (2014). Poverty Reduction during the rural–urban transformation – The role
of the missing middle. World Development Vol. 63, pp. 43–58.
 Christiaensen, L. (2013). Introduction: rural diversification, secondary towns and poverty reduction: Do
not miss the middle. Agricultural Economics Vol. 44, pp. 433–434.
 Ravallion, M. (July 2001). On the Urbanization of Poverty. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
No. 2586. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=632655.

Abstract Index #: 384
ALTERNATIVE APPROACH OF EXPOSURE AND VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT FOR  land_use PLANNING - A CASE
OF QUY NHON CITY, CENTRAL VIETNAM
Abstract System ID#: 999
Individual Paper
GHIMIRE, Jiwnath [University of Hawaii at Manoa] jiwnath@hawaii.edu
Normative prescriptions often differ from practical experiences because the practice of planning is more complex
than what theoretical prescriptions might suggest. Today, different planning approaches inform the practice of
disaster management (preparedness, mitigation, response and recovery).  land_use planning has been a key tool
and approach for disaster mitigation (Burby, 1999; Burby, Deyle, Godschalk, & Olshansky, 2000); its effective
accommodation in disaster management calls for spatial vulnerability and exposure analysis. Planning for
resilient community means taking into account of spatial exposures and vulnerabilities in the planning process

(Highfield, Peacock, & Van Zandt, 2014). But approaches to vulnerability analysis vary a lot – some more
qualitative and community-based, others more technocratic and data-driven. Little research, however, has
explored how both these methodological approaches can be used together for making  land_use decisions that
augur long-term disaster resilience. This paper tries to address this gap with a case of Quy Nhon City, Central
Vietnam, where flooding and typhoons are frequent and devastating. Vietnam’s planning system is yet top-down
and technocratic, where the master plan, bound by national and provincial priorities and targets, guides city
development. In general, the consideration of disaster vulnerabilities and exposure is a technocratic, data-driven
process, not community-based. Using two separate assessments of exposure and vulnerability – 1) a 360household survey to understand people’s perceptions and experiences of flooding and typhoon over time, which
identifies perceived, as well as real, vulnerabilities and exposure; and 2) a spatial analysis based on interpreting
time series aerial imagery using GIS and remote sensing, which ascertains the area actually most exposed and
vulnerable to flooding and typhoons – this paper attempts to identify discrepancies between people’s
perceptions and state action, as well as perceived and real threats. Based on an investigation of two wards of the
city (Nhon Phu and Nhon Binh), this paper’s main contribution is methodological – to propose a combined
approach for vulnerability and exposure assessment for better informed  land_use planning decisions toward
community resilience.
References
 Burby, R. J. (1999). Unleashing the power of planning to create disaster-resistant comminuty.
[Viewpoint]. American Planning Association. Journal of American Planning Association, 65(3), 247-258.
 Burby, R. J., Deyle, R. E., Godschalk, D. R., & Olshansky, R. B. (2000). Creating Hazard Resilient
Communities through Land-Use Planning. Natural Hazards Review, 1(2), 99-106.
 Highfield, W. E., Peacock, W. G., & Van Zandt, S. (2014). Mitigation Planning: Why Hazard Exposure,
Structural Vulnerability, and Social Vulnerability Matter. Journal of Planning Education and Research,
34(3), 287-300. doi: 10.1177/0739456x14531828

Abstract Index #: 385
MAKING PUBLIC OPEN SPACES ACCESSIBLE TO UNDERSERVED POPULATIONS IN URBAN VILLAGES
Abstract System ID#: 1002
Individual Paper
LI, Xin [Columbia University] lixinhere@gmail.com
Slums are generally viewed by urban planners as physically incompatible with formal urban_planning because
these area are often overcrowded, structures violate local building codes, and/or dwellers reside under
substandard living conditions. However, slums also provide extremely affordable living spaces for low-income
people. Urban villages (UVs), as a unique form of slum in China, have emerged as a result of China’s dual land
ownership arrangement and its vast pace of urbanization (He et al., 2009). Developed from rural settlements,
UVs represent an existing conflict between the original rural development purpose and the new urban
development reality. Public resources, such as infrastructure and social services, have been poorly provided in
these area. The majority of residents in UVs are low-income, migrant workers. Unfortunately, the needs of these
migrant tenants for a quality living environment have not been sufficiently incorporated into city’ urban
planning policy.
Most research on urban villages in China suggests a complete elimination of the area. Similar to many slumclearance policy, the Chinese government’s general approach is to tear down existing buildings, relocate
residents to public housing, and redevelop the slum area in accordance with the city’s Master Plan. This paper,
however, argues that, rather than “comprehensive redevelopment” of UVs, “incremental upgrading” approach
should be better understood and therefore be pursued by Chinese planners during the course of urbanization.
The purpose of this study is to explore the question: How can planners make public resources accessible to
underserved populations in China’s UVs? More specifically, it examines the usage of Public Open Space (POS) by
UVs’ residents, using a case study of Baishizhou Village, the largest urban village in Shenzhen, China. Through a

questionnaire survey of 150 POS users and 10 in-depth interviews with public officials, residents, and design
professionals, our findings suggest that, in the planning process of POS, planners’ narrow understanding of the
functionality of POS constrains the efficacy of this slum upgrading approach.
References
 Crawford, D. et al. (2008). Do features of public open spaces vary according to neighbourhood socioeconomic status ? Health & place, 14, 889–893
 He, S., Liu, Y., Webster, C., & Wu, F. (2009). Property Rights Redistribution, Entitlement Failure and the
Impoverishment of Landless Farmers in China. Urban Studies, 46(9), 1925–1949.
 Hernández Bonilla, M. (2013). The significance and meanings of public space improvement in lowincome neighbourhoods “colonias populares” in Xalapa-Mexico. Habitat International, 38, 34–46.
 Shan, X.-Z. (2014). Socio-demographic variation in motives for visiting urban green spaces in a large
Chinese city. Habitat International, 41, 114–120.
 Schipperijn, J., Ekholm, O., Stigsdotter, U. K., Toftager, M., Bentsen, P., Kamper-Jørgensen, F., &
Randrup, T. B. (2010). Factors influencing the use of green space: Results from a Danish national
representative survey. Landscape and urban_planning, 95(3), 130–137.

Abstract Index #: 386
PLANNING THROUGH SPACES OF EXCEPTION: SOCIO-SPATIAL MARGINALITY, VIOLENCE AND THE EMERGENCE
OF SOCIAL URBANISM IN MEDELLIN
Abstract System ID#: 1022
Individual Paper
SOTOMAYOR, Luisa [University of Toronto] luisa.sotomayor@utoronto.ca
Medellín, a city known as one of the most unequal and violent in the world, has recently been praised as an
example of urban innovation. Grounded on claims to social justice and democracy, mayors Fajardo (2004-2007)
and Salazar (2008-2011) adopted a policy called social urbanism. With this approach, Medellín expanded
infrastructure and social investments to marginalized districts, instituted participatory program, and sought to
integrate precarious enclaves in the “formal” city through transit policy, public spaces, and emblematic
architecture.
This paper is about the emergence of “social urbanism.” It seeks to reveal its origins, political rationalities, and
tactics on the ground. Based on document analysis, semi-structured interviews with key actors, and focus group
data, I examine the connections among socio-spatial marginality, conflict, urban politics, and entrepreneurial
urban governance arrangements. Most crucially, I identify the gaps and ambivalences that emerge between the
politics of three disparate logics at play: first, goals of development and socio-spatial redistribution; second, the
pressures city face to repair local economies and attract foreign resources; and third, the influence of violent
actors, including both organized crime and the repressive arm of the state.
While the promises of social urbanism are commendable and have been loudly conveyed internationally, an
analysis of social urbanism at the neighbourhood scale reveals a mode of emergency planning that turns area of
intervention into spaces of exception from city ordinances and governance arrangements. Through a large-scale
Urban Development Project approach, social urbanism seeks to expedite implementation and generate a swift
sense of transformation. I argue that, the implications of relying on exceptions need to be carefully considered
since vested interests can easily co-opt the planning process.
Furthermore, violence, and social and economic dislocations in the city are still profound, particularly in area
such as Comuna 13, where non-state armed groups prevent residents from capturing many of the benefits of
urban upgrading. Despite new public works projects and state presence, criminal networks have retained their
territorial influence. Because Medellin’s urban innovations are being implemented along the ongoing sway of
illegal violent actors, governance in these spaces can be characterized as a contradictory “orderly disorder.”

References
 Agamben, Giorgio (2005). State of exception. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
 Allen, J. & A. Cochrane (2007). Beyond the territorial fix: regional assemblages, politics and power.
Regional Studies 41.9, 1161–75.
 Holston, J. (2008). Insurgent citizenship: Disjunctions of democracy and modernity in Brazil. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
 Ong, A. (2006). Neoliberalism as exception: Mutations in citizenship and sovereignty. Durham: Duke
University Press.
 Roy, A. (2011). Slumdog city: Rethinking Subaltern urbanism. International Journal of Urban and
Regional Research, 35(2), 223-238.

Abstract Index #: 387
PLANNING FOR DISASTER RESILIENCE: LESSONS FROM THE RECOVERY AND RECONSTRUCTION AFTER
TYPHOON YOLANDA IN THE PHILIPPINES
Abstract System ID#: 1029
Individual Paper
KOBAYASHI, Hisako [Kagoshima University] k3392905@kadai.jp
On November 8, 2013, Super Typhoon Yolanda, known internationally as Typhoon Haiyan, hit the Eastern Visayas
and surrounding regions in the Philippines, its unprecedented storm surge leaving more than 6,300 people dead
and nearly 29,000 persons injured. The government enacted the Philippine Disaster Risk Reeducation and
Management (DRRM) Act in 2010 to improve the disaster resilience of comminuty in one of the most disasterprone countries in the world. When the typhoon arrived, however, the country was unprepared to deal with a
mega-disaster like Yolanda. After the disaster, the government launched efforts to improve the disaster risk
reduction and management framework, with assistance from international organizations and donors. In order to
improve disaster resilience, this paper discusses the issues and problems associated with the DRRM institutional
framework in the Philippines, especially regarding the planning system, by examining the recovery and
reconstruction process after Typhoon Yolanda.
A community’s disaster resilience can be enhanced by reducing that community’s vulnerability. Vulnerability to
disaster is based on the community’s hazard risk, preparedness, adaptive capacity, and socio-economic
characteristics, among other things. In developing countries like the Philippines, DRRM is integrated into the
development process under the slogan of sustainable development. The Philippine DRRM Act stipulated
mainstreaming DRRM in various development plans, such as Comprehensive  land_use Plans (CLUP) and
Comprehensive development plans, among others. Local Government Units (LGUs) are in charge of policy making
for and implementation of DRRM program and projects. LGUs have developed Local Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management (LDRRM) Plans and established LDRRM Offices. Despite initiatives for the improvement of disaster
resilience, at the time of Yolanda, DRRM institutional development was only half complete at both the central
and local levels. After the disaster, the government took action to improve the DRRM system. In line with the Act,
international organizations as UNDP rushed to assist the LGUs in mainstreaming DRRM in CLUPs, long-term
development plans of local governments. A new guideline for CLUP preparation was issued to incorporate
climate and disaster risk assessment (CDRA) in the planning process.
Nevertheless, the Philippines’ local planning system is not necessarily effective at promoting and guiding
development and  land_use. The planning offices of LGUs are overwhelmed by preparing the many plans required
by different national agencies; in addition, they lack sufficient capacity, resources, and support. Not all LGUs have
finished preparing CLUPs, the master plans of LGUs, and other required plans, and for LGUs with CLUPs, it is
uncertain if the plans have been effectively implemented. Inconsistencies have also been found in  land_use or
infrastructure proposed in the CLUPs of neighboring LGUs due to a lack of coordination between LGUs and
fragmented political institutions. Adding the requirement of preparing an LDRRMP and performing a CDRA to the
CLUP planning process would place an additional burden on LGUs. Hence, the Philippine DRRM institutional
framework’s strong reliance on the LGUs’ planning and implementing capacity is not necessarily expected to

result in improved disaster resilience because of the issues and constraints inherent to the planning system and
local institutions.
This research thus examines ways in which the Philippine DRRM institutional framework can be improved,
focusing on the local planning system, based on insights gained into the recovery and reconstruction projects
after Yolanda in the Eastern Visayas Region while working as a consultant for a bilateral donor from April 2014 to
February 2015. The paper analyzes theories related to disaster resilience improvement, planning system issues
and problems, and the DRRM institutional framework of the Philippines, and reviews international assistance
with disaster recovery and reconstruction, in order to provide recommendations for enhancing disaster risk
reduction and management institutions.

Abstract Index #: 388
ESTIMATING TENURE SECURITY PREMIUM IN INFORMAL HOUSING MARKETS: AN APPLICATION OF SPATIAL
HEDONIC METHODS TO SLUMS IN PUNE, INDIA
Abstract System ID#: 1032
Individual Paper
NAKAMURA, Shohei [World Bank] snakamura2@worldbank.org
Due to the inadequate supply of affordable housing in the formal housing markets, a vast number of people
currently reside in informal settlements in the rapidly urbanizing Global South. Those people tend to be
vulnerable to the risk of forced eviction because of the lack of land ownership and other reasons. Some scholars
and policy makers regard the formalization of informal land tenure as an effective approach to enhancing the
tenure security of the residents of informal settlements (Payne, 2001). However, another strand of literature
emphasizes the importance of de facto tenure security that is shaped by a variety of non-legal factors (Doebele,
1987). A critical question is: to what extent can formalized land tenure benefit the residents of informal
settlements in the presence of other legal and non-legal factors that contribute to their de facto tenure security?
My paper addresses the empirical question above by focusing on Pune, India. In Pune, where a third of its three
million population live in slums, government agencies have formalized some slum settlements under “slum
declaration” policy. Residents in formalized slums, or “declared” slums, are legally protected from forced eviction
without due legal process and compensation. I examine how slum residents evaluate the benefit of slum
declaration through a spatial hedonic approach.
The data for this study comes from the following two surveys. I collected surveys from 562 households in 56
slums in Pune in 2013. The survey data contains detailed information about housing, household, and slum
characteristics. In addition to the primary survey data, I draw on the Pune Slum Atlas, which was prepared by a
local non-profit organization based in Pune. I mainly retrieved slum-level information from the atlas.
As reviewed by Payne, Durand-Lasserve, & Rakodi (2009), the quantitative analysis of the impact of land tenure
formalization has been scarce. In particular, analyzing informal housing markets through hedonic models has
been a rare endeavor to date (an example is Crane, Daniere, & Harwood, 1997) mainly due to the lack of reliable
data. Despite the richness of information in my data, the estimation of the slum declaration premium still can be
biased due to unobserved heterogeneity. My paper deals with this problem by taking advantage of a recent
spatial econometrics model, the generalized spatial two-stage least squares (Kelejian & Prucha, 2010), which
accounts for spatial effects and heterogeneity. To the best of my knowledge, this is the first application of such
spatial hedonic model to urban slums.
This paper finds that the estimated premium of slum declaration worth 18% of the average housing rent in slums,
and that the associated marginal willingness to pay is 6% of the average household expenditure in Pune slums.
This finding suggests that even if it does not provide full property rights, slum declaration has benefited slum
residents by ensuring their occupancy.

References
 Crane, R., Daniere, A., & Harwood, S. (1997). The contribution of environment amenities to lowincome housing: A comparative study of Bangkok and Jakarta. Urban Studies, 34(9), 1495–1512.
 Doebele, W. A. (1987). The evolution of concepts of urban land tenure in developing countries. Habitat
International, 11(1), 7–22.
 Kelejian, H., & Prucha, I. (2010). Spacification and estimation of spatial autoregressive models with
autoregressive and heteroskedastic disturbances. Journal of Econometrics, 157(1), 53–67.
 Payne, G. (2001). Urban land tenure policy options: Titles or rights? Habitat International, 25(3), 415–
429.
 Payne, G., Durand-Lasserve, A., & Rakodi, C. (2009). The limits of land titling and home ownership.
Environment and Urbanization, 21(2), 443–462.

Abstract Index #: 389
CREATING SPACE FOR THE FORMAL AMONGST THE INFORMAL: AN EXAMINATION OF URBAN HOUSING
POLICIES AND CHANGING COALITION POLITICS IN INDIAN city
Abstract System ID#: 1038
Pre-organized Session: The Politics of Making and Re-making: Transnationalism, Circulation and the Emergent in
Urban and Community Development
MCPIKE, Jamie [Brown University] jamie_mcpike@brown.edu
To address the proliferation of urban slums, in 2005 the Government of India inaugurated its most ambitious
urban housing policy since Independence. The Basic Services for the Urban Poor (BSUP) scheme aims to improve
the living conditions of the poorest living in Indian city by providing improved housing and basic infrastructure.
While the goals driving BSUP are laudable, meeting the objectives of this ambitious policy has proven challenging
for urban governance institutions, and the policy has been widely criticized for failing to provide the quantity and
quality of housing required to meet the needs of the urban poor.
In the south Indian city of Bangalore, however, urban governance institutions have produced housing in large
numbers under BSUP. During the five years since implementing agencies began work on BSUP, more units of
housing were built than in the previous 30 years combined, raising doubts as to whether the policy has been an
outright failure. Rather than advancing yet another critique of the policy, therefore, this research examines how
urban governance institutions can and do produce housing for the urban poor. Drawing on 14 months of
ethnographic data collected in Bangalore between 2012 and 2014, I trace the implementation processes of three
BSUP housing projects in the city. Specifically, I focus on the motivations and strategies of state and non-state
actors as they seek to meet policy objectives and produce outcomes under BSUP. I find that project processes
and local outcomes of this federal housing policy depend on unique, multi-scalar assemblages of state and nonstate actors mobilizing both formal and informal processes for a given project. While existing literature on urban
governance in India has highlighted the role of informal coalitions in a number of cases—slum rehabilitation,
urban land acquisition, etc.—this approach has largely ignored the meso-level political-institutional structures
that shape the actions of actors. In fact, most research on urban India assumes that institutional procedures are
largely flouted as actors choose to work through informal social networks to achieve various goals.
This literature also tends to limit the scope of action for various actors to particular scales. With the emergence
of BSUP—a results-driven policy characterized by strict deadlines and oversight at all levels of government—new
institutional structures have been created, opening up opportunities for actors to mobilize formal channels to
influence policy processes. This has had numerous effects on urban governance. Actors who were previously
excluded from informal channels utilize policy procedures to insert themselves into urban processes. Further,
when implementation agencies are not performing, state and non-state actors strategically use policy structures
to circumvent the agency, often employing multi-scalar tactics to pressurize nonperforming actors to produce
outcomes. In this sense, the actions of groups are not restricted to specific scales, as multi-scalar assemblages
prove most effective in achieving policy outcomes.

The findings from this research, therefore, not only improves our understanding of housing and urban_planning
policies in India, but also sheds light on how multi-scalar governing processes shape developmental outcomes in
newly urbanizing contexts of the Global South.
References
 Benjamin, Solomon. 2008. "Occupancy Urbanism: Radicalizing Politics and Economy Beyond Policy and
Programs." International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 32:3, 719–729.
 Sami, Neha. 2013. “From Farming to Development: Urban Coalitions in Pune, India.” International
Journal of Urban and Regional Research 37:1, 151-164.
 Stone, Clarence. 1989. Regime Politics: Governing Atlanta 1946–1988. Lawrence, KS: University Press of
Kansas.
 Weinstein, Liza. 2008. “Mumbai’s Development Mafias: Globalization, Organized Crime and Land
Development.” International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 32:1, 22-39.

Abstract Index #: 390
BARRIERS TO INTEGRATION OF INFORMAL TRANSPORT: THREE CASE STUDIES
Abstract System ID#: 1061
Individual Paper
STOY, Kelan [University of California, Berkeley] kstoy@berkeley.edu, presenting author
CHATMAN, Daniel [University of California, Berkeley] dgc@berkeley.edu, primary author
RAYLE, Lisa [University of California, Berkeley] lrayle@berkeley.edu
GOLUB, Aaron [Arizona State Unversity] aaron.golub@asu.edu
CERVERO, Robert [University of California, Berkeley] robertc@berkeley.edu
Bus rapid transit (BRT) has become a global phenomenon over the past decade. This trend is especially prominent
in the Global South, where many city are using new publicly operated BRT lines to replace or restructure
privately-provided and often unregulated jitneys, passenger vans, and other small shared vehicles, or what we
refer to here as “informal transport.” This practice raises a number of questions, and we focus on two. First, how
should informal transportation be incorporated as public transportation becomes formalized? Second, what approach for
integration is likely to be successful, given wide variations in local context?
Salazar Ferro et al (2012) investigated potential operational structures available for integrating formal and
informal services with BRT, showing the strengths and weaknesses of various route structures and payment
schemes available to city. Yet in many cases, a larger barrier to integration is not physical or design
considerations, but rather the greater political and economic contexts that influence how policy-makers and
politicians engage with preexisting operators. As Flores Dewey (2013) noted in the cases of Mexico City and
Santiago, decisions on how to improve the transportation network were highly dependent on the pre-existing
structure of the paratransit sector and their relationship with the governing authorities.
For this paper, we are carrying out a qualitative analysis of the historical context for BRT projects recently
realized in three Global South city: Cape Town, South Africa; Barranquilla, Colombia; and Quito, Ecuador. Each
city has attempted a unique approach to incorporating the informal transportation sector into the new BRT network,
and each has done so with varying levels of success. To shed light on the historical context guiding the
development of BRT in each city, we interview key stakeholders active in the sector, as well as informal transport
operators.
Our preliminary findings suggest that the particular integration approach proposed for each system was less
decided as a matter of operational efficiency and more a function of the short-term political constraints on
leaders at the time. Ultimately, our research seeks to mend the literature on the politics of transportation
planning in the Global South with the literature on the operational design of integrated system to identify
approaches that reconcile the reality of short-term political interests with feasible integration approaches that
adapt to the political realities at the time.

References
 Flores Dewey, Onésimo Alberto. (2013) Expanding transportation planning capacity in city of the global
South: public-private collaboration and conflict in Chile and Mexico. Diss. Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.
 Salazar Ferro, P., Behrens, R., & Golub, A. (2012) Planned and paratransit service integration through
trunk and feeder arrangements: An international review. 31st Southern African transportation Conference:
Getting Southern Africa to Work, Pretoria.
 Salazar Ferro, P., Behrens, R., & Wilkinson, P. (2013) Hybrid Urban transportation system in Developing
Counties: Portents and prospects. Research in Transportation Economics. 39: 121-132.

Abstract Index #: 391
A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE TO SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT: GREEN EXCHANGE AND WASTE PICKERS IN CURITIBA,
BRAZIL
Abstract System ID#: 1071
Individual Paper
MACEDO, Joseli [University of Florida] joseli@ufl.edu
Solid waste management is one of the most vexing issues for city. In the developed world, landfills are reaching
capacity and several city are at different stages of implementation of recycling program and mandatory bans
on organic waste from collected garbage. In the developing world, while some city do not even have regular
garbage collection, others have found innovative, alternative ways to not only collect, but also recycle waste,
reducing pollution in the built and natural environments and creating opportunities for improved and productive
livelihoods.
One such city is Curitiba, a primate capital city of about two million people located in southern Brazil. More than
20 years ago, Curitiba implemented program that would jointly address environment and social problems in a
rapidly urbanizing but not highly developed city. This paper looks at two different strategies used in Curitiba to
address solid waste problems. One, the Green Exchange program, was conceived and is managed by the local
government and exchanges local produce for garbage; the other, waste pickers’ cooperatives, is a grassroots
initiative that not only turned into a profitable business, but also became the main source of income for
thousands of families living in informal settlements.
The central purpose of this research is to determine how effective alternative replacement and recycling
programs can be in contributing to solid waste management in major city. A historical overview of the Green
Exchange program and the formation of waste pickers cooperatives in Curitiba, Brazil, illustrates two different
approaches: one driven by the local government, institutionalized, and supported by tax payers, the other
created out of necessity, entrepreneurial in nature, and grounded on informality. The effectiveness of these two
approaches is evaluated both quantitatively and qualitatively. Quantitative data shows not only the amount of
garbage collected through these two different means and the decrease in landfill volume leading to an extension
of time to full capacity, but also the number of jobs created and families whose livelihoods depend on these
initiatives. Qualitative data shows socio-economic, environment, and political advances resulting from these
approaches to solid waste management. Ultimately, the goal is to demonstrate that unorthodox alternatives to
formal urban management system can have positive outcomes and externalities.
This research is relevant to all urban places looking for innovative ways to diminish their solid waste footprint and
to create less polluted city, especially those with scarce resources, while fostering healthier and better
nourished populations and creating jobs. The Curitiba experience suggests that alternative solutions to solid
waste management that involve the community in the arduous task of reducing and managing solid waste can be
successful with or without the support of local governments.

References
 Boons, F. and M. Wagner. 2009. Assessing the relationship between economic and ecological
performance: Distinguishing system levels and the role of innovation. Ecological Economics 68 (7):19081914.
 Fergutz, O., S. Dias, and D. Mitlin. 2011. Developing urban waste management in Brazil with waste picker
organizations. Environment and Urbanization 23 (2):597-608.
 Kruljac, S. 2012. Public-Private Partnerships in Solid Waste Management: Sustainable Development
Strategies for Brazil. Bulletin of Latin American Research 31 (2):222-236.
 Melo, Lucas Araújo, Klaus Dieter Sautter, and Paulo Roberto Janissek. 2009. Estudo de cenários para o
gerenciamento dos resíduos sólidos urbanos de Curitiba. Engenharia Sanitaria e Ambiental 14 (4):551558.
 Suzuki, H. et al. 2010. Eco2 city: ecological city as economic city. Washington, D.C: World Bank.

Abstract Index #: 392
THEORETICAL MODELS EXPLAINING CHINA'S REGIONAL INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT COINCIDING WITH RAPID
URBANIZATION
Abstract System ID#: 1079
Individual Paper
LI, Lingling [University of Kansas] l923l294@ku.edu, presenting author, primary author
DUNNING, Anne [University of Kansas] dunning@ku.edu
Since 1978, China’s Reform and Opening policy has brought rapid urban growth and industrialization, but
industrialization is occurring unevenly across the country. From 1980 to 2013, the urbanization rate increased
from around 19 percent to more than 50 percent (National Bureau of Statistics of China). Inland laborers cannot
find work while coastal employees cannot fill jobs. To solve the problems China's central government announced
three important policy of industrial readjustment and transference in recent years. The effect has not been
notable, which leads to the question of how China can predict and influence its regional industrial development.
The objectives of this research were:
•
•

to identify the most suitable models of regional development to explain industrial transference observed
between China’s coastal region and its interior and
to measure if China has the potential to follow the industrial transference modes from the chosen
models.

To explain industrial transference and readjustment, six potential regional theories were considered. The Flying
Geese Model suggests production of commoditized goods moves from developed countries to developing
countries in a pattern resembling how geese fly in a skein. The Product Life-Cycle Theory indicates a similar
process that further labels three gradients of production: new, mature, and standardized. The Pole-Axis
Development Theory traces regional economic development along corridors of transportation, waterways, and
energy lines. Location Theory, New Economic Geography, and Cluster Development offer models of regional
economies according to spatial allocations of lowest production costs; industrial core and agricultural periphery;
and, well-functioning clusters, respectively.
Qualitative analysis included SWOT and descriptive data analysis to compare theoretical model patterns against
China’s actual regional industrial development trends. This examination identified applicable models from the six
potential models of industrial transference and adjustment. Two theoretical models were selected: the Flying
Geese Model and Cluster Development.
Quantitative inquiry included an empirical analysis and model testing to examine if China already has industrial
transference following one or both of the chosen models. The empirical analysis explored the key variables of
factories, gross domestic product, and employment using a Gini coefficient. Dummy coding indicated capital flow

among regions to measure potential to follow Cluster Development and changes of industrial output among
regions to identify if industrial transference has followed the Flying Geese Model. The research indicated that
after 2005, industrial development followed the pattern of the Flying Geese Model and the Cluster Development
in some area of China. This result has provided foundation for further model implementation and prediction.
References
 Cai Fang, Wang Dewen, and Qu Yue. 2009. Flying Geese within borders: How China sustains its laborintensive industries? Journal of Economic Research, 2009, Volume 09.
 L’Harmet, C. (1998). The organization of industry and location: Alfred Weber revisited. In Bellet, M.,
&L’Harmet, C. (Eds.), Industry, space and competition: The contribution of economists of the past (pp.
122–140). Cheltenham, UK: Elgar.
 Paul Krugman (1991). Increasing Returns and Economic Geography. Journal of Political Economy, 1991,
vol. 99, no.3.
 Satoru Kumagai (2008). Journey through the Secret History of the Flying Geese Model. Institute of
Developing Economies Discussion Paper, 2008 No. 158.
 UNIDO (2005). Western China: Enhancing Industrial Competitiveness and Employment. Technical Report
of United Nations Industrial Development Organization.

Abstract Index #: 393
CROSSING BOUNDARIES EVERYDAY: ENGAGED RESEARCH AND LEARNING AT THE NILGIRIS FIELD LEARNING
CENTER, INDIA
Abstract System ID#: 1093
Pre-organized Session: Beyond Boilerplate Participatory Planning: Notes from the Field
KUDVA, Neema [Cornell University] kudva@cornell.edu
Each morning, a group of students at the Nilgiris Field Learning Center (NFLC) in the hill-town of Kotagiri start the
day with a “Crossing Boundaries Exercise”. The students include young men and women from surrounding adivasi
(indigenous) comminuty and an equal number of undergraduates from various Colleges at Cornell, all of whom
are spending 15 weeks at the NFLC, an interdisciplinary collaboration between Cornell and the Indian NGO, the
Keystone Foundation. Dubbed the CBE, these exercises are pedagogically straightforward: at one level they
support situated conversational Tamil and English language learning around a gamut of issues. Each exercise is
carefully curated: the framing issues echo and introduce the week’s learning theme, just as they emerge from
research projects that are generated through on-going conversations with community members and Keystone
staff. What has proven just as interesting is the ways in which the CBE open up conversations across groups in the
NFLC: difficult boundary spanning conversations that the project partners see as essential to the goals of building
the capacity of community members, researchers, future policy-makers, global citizens to plan and manage for
right livelihoods and sustainable development in fast-changing complex ecological landscapes like that of the
Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve (NBR). Describing the CBE, its planning, structure and outcomes, allows this paper to get
to the heart of a set of issues that shape and condition interaction and engagement – processes that are central
to participatory planning in complex settings.
The NBR provides such a complex planning context. A global ecological diversity and endemism hotspot spanning
12 districts in three states, it contains an astonishing diversity of cultures and comminuty including more than
30 adivasi groups who, at about 16 percent of the total NBR population of 1.2 million people, are among the
region’s poorest and most marginalized. The adivasi make their livelihoods through a combination of strategies
that include subsistence agriculture, growing small quantities of commercial crops, wage labor in plantations and
other regional industry, and gathering non-timber forest produce for sale and consumption. As important is rapid
urbanization and the challenges and opportunities this presents. The Nilgiris district, where the NFLC is based, is
about 59 percent urban according to the 2011 Indian census. For planners, the NBR also presents unique
governance challenges with multiple states and different political economic system at work. Several institutions
and organizations play a role in a single district within the reserve: Forest and Wildlife Conservators; District
Administration with elected representatives and administrators; the presence of Central and State Government

agencies and program; social groups based on caste, religious, or occupational affinities; numerous NGOs; and
networks of businesses in a thriving economic base of tourism, expanding plantations, and growing
industrialization that favors outsiders and urbanites. In addition to these formal organizations and the associated
divisions of labor and authority, there are the interrelated informal institutions that structure locally embedded
economic relations in comminuty, landscapes, and sectors. For example, to enhance conservation of a
particular ecological community and the health and livelihood benefits associated with that community, be it
forest honey, medicinal plants, an endangered species or a water stream polluted by dumping of human or
industrial waste, we need to develop an understanding of the public policy, private interests, and collective
norms that structure access.
This brief description serves to underscore the complexity of the situation NFLC researchers and students face as
they forge sustained partnerships to tackle pressing issues. This paper will approach some of the challenges
through the lens of the CBE, the everyday exercise that epitomizes the many boundaries of culture, world-view,
and disciplines that the NFLC community seeks to transgress.
References
 Hooks, b. 1994. Teaching to Transgress: Education as the Practice of Freedom. London: Routledge.
 Horten, M. and P. Freire. 1990. We Make the Road by Walking: Conversations on Education and Social
Change. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
 Kashwan, P. 2013. The politics of rights-based approaches in conservation.  land_use Policy 31: 613-626
 Narayansamy, N. 2009. Participatory Rural Appraisal: Principles, Methods and Applications. New Delhi,
India: Sage Publications
 Nath, Sneh. 2012. The Tiger and the Broom. Kotagiri: Keystone Foundation.

Abstract Index #: 394
PLANNING BETWEEN THE LONG NOW AND TOMORROW'S YESTERDAY: MULTI-SCALE SOCIAL-ECOLOGICAL
RESEARCH AND ACTION IN TIMES AND PLACES OF RAPID DEVELOPMENT
Abstract System ID#: 1091
Pre-organized Session: Beyond Boilerplate Participatory Planning: Notes from the Field
ABRAMSON, Daniel [University of Washington] abramson@uw.edu
Planners naturally struggle to achieve a balance between the poles of multiple axes, among which are: the need
for short-term action, and long-term monitoring, data-gathering, analysis and sustained evaluation; the
application of specialized scientific expertise, and the broadening of social participation in decision-making; the
mobilization of existing power centers, and the empowerment of discounted voices and assets; and the
preservation and adaptation of time-tested historical knowledge, values and practices on one hand, and the
adoption of new technologies and acknowledgement of changing, unpredictable circumstances on the other. In
response to accelerating information-technological change, we might see Stewart Brand’s concept of the “long
now” (2008) as a call to rebalance on a collective societal scale what Daniel Kahneman has identified in
individuals as “fast” and “slow” thinking (2011). These needs and tensions are increased in societies and
communities currently undergoing rapid urbanization and development from positions of relative historical
material poverty, colonization and/or peripheralization – noting that this relativity is a matter of scale; positions
of advantage at one scale are often disadvantaged at another. In such contexts, political-economic positions
become outdated overnight, and various factors tend to compress the time horizons of decisions, eroding social
relations of trust and inhibiting the long-term incorporation of diverse forms of knowledge and the sustained
monitoring of effects (Lora-Wainwright 2014).
As a possible solution, social-ecological system theory suggests that system are resilient when they are: diverse
and heterogeneous; self-organized; and involve modularity and self-sufficiency at each scale as well as multiple
cross-scale interactions that function as feedback loops (Alberti 2013). Scale in this context refers to space, time
and social organization. Finding, measuring and accomplishing these features in a system is thus a supremely
complex and interdisciplinary exercise. Our paper reflects on this challenge through describing the work of a

loosely coordinated multidisciplinary group of faculty and students at the University of Washington (Seattle),
Sichuan University (Chengdu), and other partner institutions engaged in urban_planning, design, policy,
anthropology, history, environment science, and law in the Chengdu Plain of Sichuan Province, China. In key
respects, Sichuan is a microcosm of China, and the Chengdu Plain, the nation’s largest irrigation district, has
sustained over 2,000 years of history as probably the most productive per-hectare regional producer of grain in
China. During the past decade, and likely for the first time in its history, urbanization has turned the Plain from a
net grain exporter into a grain importer. Spatially, our work focuses on agricultural comminuty and households
at Chengdu’s expanding periphery, but also extends to metropolitan governance and finance, regional watershed
management, and national policy of urban development, food security and global trade. Topical foci range
from the role of formal and informal property rights in access to land and urban space; shifts in the value of rural
labor and products; the measurement of settlement form and cultural landscapes; and the growth and potential
of critical and alternative grassroots rural development, food safety, and urban-rural mutual assistance
movements, such as New Rural Reconstructionism. Methodologically, the work integrates quantitative analysis
of social-ecological resilience with individual and collective participant observation and engagement in planning
and policy development. Rather than report detailed findings from our investigations, the paper presents them
in summary, and attempts to draw from them a framework for research on the interaction between biophysical
realities and human agency, such that planning can more consciously strengthen feedback between long and
short term, global and local, and personal and collective actions at multiple scales.
References
 Alberti, Marina. Building city that Think Like Planets. 2013.
 Brand, Stewart. Clock of the Long Now: Time and Responsibility. Basic Books, 2008.
 Kahneman, Daniel. Thinking, Fast and Slow. Macmillan, 2011.
 Lora-Wainwright, Anna. "Grassroots Perspectives on Relocation: Threats and Opportunities." positions
22, no. 3 (July 1, 2014 2014): 661-89.

Abstract Index #: 395
HISTORY, POLICY AND POLITICS: ENVISIONING DELHI AS MORE HUMANE AND JUST "GLOBAL CITY"
Abstract System ID#: 1105
Individual Paper
RISHI, Susmita [University of Washington] srishi@uw.edu, presenting author, primary author
CHALANA, Manish [University of Washington] chalana@uw.edu
Cities in India, as in much of the developing world, are rapidly growing owing to a combination of forces
unleashed by economic liberalization and globalization. Delhi, India’s capital city has nearly doubled in population
in the last two decades alone. Every day, thousands of migrants from the villages and towns of north India come
looking for work to the city. The majority of this migrant population lives in a variety of informal settlements
dispersed throughout the metropolitan area, which can provide a launching pad and a sense of community. Many
these settlements, however, have insufficient urban infrastructure and sometimes lack even the most basic
amenities of clean water and toilets. This paper reviews the history of Delhi’s attempts to deal with the issue of
urban informality, from British colonial schemes, through the work of the Delhi Development Authority (DDA),
and on to the more recent Master Plans. It seeks to understand how these approaches toward planning for the
urban poor have evolved in the last six decades, and what their consequences have been.
Through a critical analysis of these schemes and policy, we argue that the prevailing approach to addressing
urban informality continues to favour the interests of the city’s elites while neglecting the needs of the roughly
four million people who live and work in such area. Over the past five decades, there has been considerable
advancement in planning scholarship on the topic of urban informality, some of which has been slowly integrated
into the approaches used in Delhi, although more in theory and language than in practice. Nevertheless, the
overall approach used by the relevant municipal and national bodies in Delhi continues to rely on outmoded
approaches to urban_planning that are inherently inequitable and unsustainable. We delve into the case of
Kathputli Colony, a settlement of street performers and other groups to demonstrate the need for alternative

models of urban_planning that prioritise social equity over real estate profitability, enabling Delhi to achieve its
stated goal of becoming a healthy, humane and more socially just “global city”.
References
 Roy, Ananya. “Slumdog city: Rethinking Subaltern Urbanism.” International Journal of Urban and
Regional Research 35, 2 (March 11, 2011): 223–238.
 Sivaramakrishnan, K C. 2011. Re-Visioning Indian city: The Urban Renewal Mission. New Delhi, India;
Thousand Oaks, Calif.: SAGE Publications.
 Ghertner, David Asher. “Nuisance Talk and the Propriety of Property: Middle Class Discourses of a SlumFree Delhi.” Antipode 44, 4 (November 8, 2011d): 1–27.
 Bhan, Gautam. 2009. “‘This Is No Longer the City I Once Knew’. Evictions, the Urban Poor and the Right
to the City in Millennial Delhi.” Environment and Urbanization 21 (1) (April 1): 127–142.
 Dupont, Véronique D.N. 2011. “The Dream of Delhi as a Global City.” International Journal of Urban and
Regional Research 35 (3) (May 11): 533–554.

Abstract Index #: 396
INTERNATIONAL PLANNING “COURSE DEVELOPMENT ROUNDTABLE”
Abstract System ID#: 1108
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session
RUMBACH, Andrew [University of Colorado Denver] andrew.rumbach@ucdenver.edu
HOEY, Lesli [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] lhoey@umich.edu
One of the most common challenges facing planning educators is “keeping current” in area of planning where
they teach but do not have an active research agenda. For example, a professor may conduct research primarily
on housing, but teach her department’s core graduate course on international planning, which is necessarily
broader in scope. The annual meeting of the ACSP is an ideal venue for planning educators to meet with
colleagues who teach similar core courses and to share their recommendations for research and pedagogical
tools in their subfields of planning.
We propose to create a new type of ACSP session, which we call a “Course Development Roundtable.” The basic
concept is to invite a group of 10 scholars, each active in a different area of research or practice that is commonly
taught in a core graduate course. This year, we will convene an “International Planning Course Development
Roundtable” that will feature ten scholars who specialize in such area as housing, economic development,
informality, urban poverty, water and sanitation, climate change planning, natural hazard mitigation, etc.
Each scholar would prepare four pieces of information ahead of the roundtable:
1.

2.

3.
4.

One suggestion for a ‘classic’ reading in their area with a short justification for why it should be included
on a contemporary syllabus. A ‘classic’ reading is one of those key pieces that were provocative or even
paradigm changing for their time, or pieces many people totally disagree with today, but which set the
stage for later scholarship and debates;
One suggestion for an ‘overview’ reading or case study, with a short explanation of why it is effective. An
‘overview’ reading is one that review the state of knowledge in the field, and very often might be a
literature review or case study with terrific grounding in the literature. These readings are helpful for
showing where the current state of knowledge is, where the gaps are, and where the field might be
heading.
One suggestion for a ‘cutting edge’ reading that represents the best new work in their field in the past
year, and a justification for why it is fresh or exciting;
One assignment, in-class exercise, or other activity that they have used effectively to teach their
specialization, with a short description of why it has proved effective in the classroom

At the ACSP meeting, the roundtable will proceed in a modified “PechaKucha” style. To keep the session on-time
and within the designated time slot, each presenter will be given five slides to summarize the above pieces of
information (one title slide + one slide for each piece of info). The slides automatically advance, forcing the
presenter to quickly succinctly describe their reading choices and associated pedagogical tool.
The roundtable organizers will be responsible for identifying presenters, providing a slide template for the
“PechaKucha” presentation, assembling the presentations ahead of the roundtable, moderating the session, and
making the slides available to the broader planning community post-conference.

Abstract Index #: 397
URBAN INFORMALITY & INSTITUTIONALISM IN environment PLANNING (REVIVING DELHI'S OPEN DRAINRIVER ECOSYSTEM BY PROVIDING WASTE MANAGEMENT IN INFORMAL SETTLEMENTS)
Abstract System ID#: 1133
Individual Paper
SYAL, Shruti [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] syal2@illinois.edu
CONTEXT
The stretch of the Yamuna river in Delhi, India, has been declared "dead" and unfit for all purposes except
navigation, which is impossible given the river narrowing considerably. Severe pollution due to wastewater
discharged by improper agricultural runoff, industrial discharge, and faulty sewage treatment plants (STPs) is the
culprit. Millions have gone into river cleanup over 2 decades, but the problem cannot be effectively dealt with by
just setting up STPs and pipelines that will not provide access to jhuggis (informalsettlements). Absence of
wastewater cleanup, solid waste management, and latrines predisposes jhuggi inhabitants to polluting behavior.
This study aims to understand how the jhuggis contribute to drain and river pollution, and what kind of an
intervention could prevent this.
Since providing these services in the haphazard building typology of jhuggis is challenging, the state prefers to
displace them from the lands they occupy, nullah(open drain)-adjacent or otherwise. Jhuggi inhabitants are
provided with alternate accommodation at the city periphery, far away from the many jobs they have to take on
in order to support their families. But because they drive the politics and economy of the city by providing vote
banks and cheap labour, there have been more threats than actual evictions. There is no comprehensive
legislative or judicial strategy to deal with jhuggis occupying land along nullahs, and resuscitating the nullah-river
ecosystem is exigent, so an intervention factoring in the jhuggis is needed now.
METHODOLOGY
Over June-July 2014, I collected drain water samples at some nullah-adjacent jhuggis (upstream, along, and
downstream of the jhuggi), testing for phosphorus, ammonia nitrogen, suspended solids, BOD, COD, fecal
coliforms. I conducted semi-structured interviews with jhuggi inhabitants to understand their water use
dynamics, disposal habits, quantities of water used, quantities of solid waste generated, sanitation options,
regularity of municipal services, frequency of flooding in nullahs, and reasons for flooding. This data reveals the
urgency of the need for sanitation and waste management at jhuggis to prevent further pollution of the nullahriver ecosystem.
RESULTS
Most parameters cross wastewater discharge standards upstream of the jhuggis itself. So overall, jhuggis don’t
pollute the drains as much as industry, faulty STPs, or agricultural runoff, but most parameters are expected to
spike downstream of the jhuggis because they cannot dispose of their wastewater and solid waste anywhere
other than the nullahs.
Waste management is needed to prevent further pollution; constructed wetlands and bioremediation for on-site
wastewater treatment can reduce existing pollution. Given the challenging building typology of jhuggis, and the
variations between sites, an adaptable, scalable intervention design is necessary. Also, given uncertainties

surrounding which jhuggis remain at their current locations in the future, an intervention design with alternate
end-use is necessary. Lastly, given budget crunches, any additional infrastructure to be planned for and
maintained must involve low capital and maintenance costs. Constructed wetlands and bioremediation fulfil
these criteria.
SIGNIFICANCE
Pilot testing can provide necessary empirical evidence, and this study uses GIS, secondary data, and primary data
(water quality, water use-discharge dynamics) to (1) understand jhuggis’ contribution to nullah-river pollution,
and (2) prepare a design proposal for identified pilot sites.
This study emphasizes the urgency of discussing informality and institutions simultaneously to address city and
region-scale environment issues, by establishing the roles of (1) informality, in exacerbating pollution, and (2)
institutions, in predisposing jhuggis to this polluting behaviour.
References
 Roy, Ananya & AlSayyad, Nezar. 2004. Urban Informality: Transnational Perspectives from the Middle
East, South Asia, and Latin America. Lanham: Lexington Books.
 Zimmer, Anna, Inga T. Winkler, and Catarina de Albuquerque. "Governing wastewater, curbing pollution,
and improving water quality for the realization of human rights." Waterlines 33, no. 4 (2014): 337-356.
 Zimmer, Anna. "Urban Political Ecology in Megacities: The Case of Delhi’s Waste Water." In Urban
Development Challenges, Risks and Resilience in Asian Mega city, pp. 119-139. Springer Japan, 2015.
 Etzold, Benjamin, Sebastian Jülich, Markus Keck, Patrick Sakdapolrak, Thomas Schmitt, and Anna
Zimmer. "Doing institutions. A dialectic reading of institutions and social practices and its relevance for
development geography." Erdkunde (2012): 185-195.

Abstract Index #: 398
TOWARDS SUSTAINABLE AND SOCIALLY JUST URBAN WATER GOVERNANCE IN THE GLOBAL SOUTH: AN
APPROACH TO INTEGRATING LOCAL KNOWLEDGE
Abstract System ID#: 1146
Individual Paper
ACEY, Charisma [University of California, Berkeley] charisma.acey@berkeley.edu
This paper presents initial results from a pilot project in Nigeria that seeks to combine local experiences with
water governance, environment concerns and access with data on land cover change to support community
members, service providers and local government with relevant information for sustainable urban water
governance. The project is a collaboration with non-governmental organizations part of NEWSAN, a network of
local NGOs seeking to end water poverty in the country. Working with residents, stakeholders and officials, jointly
defined indicators are incorporated into an open source mobile application, allowing immediate collection of
geocoded data on pricing, quality, equity, gender differences in access, water sources and institutional actors,
problems or satisfaction, complaint mechanisms, availability of alternatives, and environment conditions. This
data is compared to newly available 10-year high resolution remote sensing imagery classified at 30 meter
resolution allowing for interpretation of the environment  impact and challenges in implementing the human
right to water in fast growing city with minimal infrastructure. Such city are highly dependent on informal and
small scale providers, and community water system, legal and illegal, that operate in tandem to official utilities
and piped infrastructure (Kjellén & McGranahan, 2006; Spencer, 2008). There is an urgent need to incorporate
the informal and small scale providers into broader analyses of urban water governance, the processes that allow
urban stakeholders to “articulate their interests….legal rights…and mediate their differences” (Bakker et al 2008,
p. 1894).
Sustainable water management requires an integrated approach that combines the social construction of water
scarcity with the biophysical complexity of surface and groundwater system (Showers, 2002). Such an approach
could be used to prioritize the knowledge and demands of the poor and marginalized, putting their information,

realities and concerns at the core of models on sustainability and water sector reform. In the literature, a growing
number of studies use remote sensing data to analyze urban development and the demand for services. Findings
from this literature have identified more complex patterns of urbanization that reveal more than statistics can
(Potts 2009), and have helped to massively scale the identification of area in slum conditions to speed up the
targeting of interventions where data is extremely limited. Globally, however, the issue of transparency of data
from the state has been identified as a major barrier to better governance, correlated with better access to
water. In Nigeria and many other countries, this problem is compounded by a lack of publicly accessible and
usable data. Findings in this paper assess how new forms of data can support the practical implementation of the
right to water. By working with comminuty in Nigeria (with an emphasis on individuals and households living in
poverty or experiencing other forms of marginalization, e.g. tenure insecurity or gender discrimination), we can
document local knowledge of hybrid arrangements in the water sector, the ability of citizens and interest groups
to negotiate varied interests and demands, and the social and environment  impact of inadequate water
provision and wastewater management in urban and peri-urban area.
References
 Bakker, K., Kooy, M., Shofiani, N. E., & Martijn, E.-J. (2008). Governance failure: rethinking the
institutional dimensions of urban water supply to poor households. World Development, 36(10), 1891–
1915.
 Kjellén, M., & McGranahan, G. (2006). Informal water vendors and the urban poor. International
Institute for Environment and Development London, UK. Retrieved from
http://www.mumbaidp24seven.in/reference/informal_water_vendors.pdf
 Potts, D. (2009). The slowing of sub-Saharan Africa’s urbanization: evidence and implications for urban
livelihoods. Environment and Urbanization, 21(1), 253–259.
 Showers, K. B. (2002). Water scarcity and urban Africa: An overview of urban–rural water linkages.
World Development, 30(4), 621–648.
 Spencer, J. H. (2008). Household Strategies for Securing Clean Water: The Demand for Piped Water in
Vietnam’s Peri-Urban Settlements. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 28(2), 213–224.
doi:10.1177/0739456X08321793

Abstract Index #: 399
THE ORGANIZATIONAL DYNAMICS OF POST-DISASTER RUBBLE CLEARANCE: PLANNING LESSONS FROM PORTAU-PRINCE, HAITI
Abstract System ID#: 1149
Individual Paper
HOOPER, Michael [Harvard University] mhooper@gsd.harvard.edu
In the face of rapid urbanization, city are increasingly at risk from major disasters (Swiss Re, 2013). As a result,
governments are more frequently finding themselves responsible for the task of rubble clearance after disaster.
While considerable attention has been given to other aspects of disasters – including immediate response, shortterm shelter provision, and long-term housing – less attention has been dedicated to the issue of rubble and its
management. The relative lack of research on this topic is surprising since the management of disaster-produced
waste has been recognized as a major challenge in a variety of geographic contexts (Pilapitiya et al., 2006;
Karunasena et al., 2009). It is also surprising given the scale of the problem. Brown et al. (2011) record ranges of
waste produced following disasters ranging from 15 million tonnes following the 1995 Kobe earthquake to an
estimated 23-60 million tonnes following the 2010 Haiti earthquake. One area that has been particularly
understudied with respect to rubble is the organization of its management and disposal. In their review of the
literature on post-disaster waste management, Brown et al. (2011: 1095) state: “There has been no integrated
research on the types of organizational models used for waste management project implementation”.
Understanding how organizations approach post-disaster rubble clearance is all the more important in a context
where the number and variety of organizational actors engaged in humanitarian response is rapidly increasing
(Stirrat, 2006).

This paper studies the organizational dynamics associated with the clearance of urban rubble through the lens of
Port-au-Prince, Haiti. It begins by investigating the context for rubble clearance, including an examination of
organizational approaches adopted in other disasters. It then analyzes detailed interviews with 52 organizations
engaged in post-disaster response and reconstruction in Port-au-Prince. The interviews provide a window onto
how these different organizations perceived and addressed the challenge of rubble clearance. The results reveal
a tension between the organizations viewed as bearing primary responsibility for rubble clearance and those that
ultimately undertook this task. A majority of respondents (66%) argued that Haitian government agencies should
be in charge of rubble clearance. The actual pattern of rubble clearance was far different, however, with the
government reporting the second lowest proportion of interviewed organizations engaged in rubble clearance.
Rather, it was Haitian NGOs, intergovernmental organizations, bilateral development agencies and private
contractors that reported greatest involvement in rubble clearance. Of the organizations that provided a reason
for why they ultimately engaged in rubble clearance, all but one cited that “it was a hurdle to other work.” This
indirect motivation for engaging in rubble clearance may explain the initially slow pace of clearance following the
disaster. The results suggest that greater pre-disaster planning for rubble clearance is essential, particularly in
settings like Port-au-Prince where the resources of the organizations expected to deliver on rubble clearance,
most notably government, are limited. The paper concludes with a number of strategies for improving the interorganizational planning and coordination of rubble clearance.
References
 Swiss Re. 2013. Mind the Risk: A Global Ranking of city Under Threat from Natural Disasters. Zurich:
Swiss Re.
 Brown, C., M. Milke and E. Seville. 2011. “Disaster waste management: A review article.” Waste
Management, 31(6): 1085-1098.
 Karunsena, G., D. Amaratunga, R. Haigh and I. Lill. 2009. “Post-disaster waste management strategies in
developing countries: Case of Sri Lanka.” Journal of Strategic Property Management, 13(2): 171-190.
 Pilapitiya, S., C. Vidanaarachchi and S. Yuen. 2006. “Effects of the tsunami on waste management in Sri
Lanka.” Waste Management, 26(2): 107-109.
 Stirrat, Jock. 2006. "Competitive humanitarianism: Relief and the tsunami in Sri Lanka." Anthropology
Today 22(5): 11-16.

Abstract Index #: 400
DECENT WORK AND SOCIAL PROTECTION IN BELO HORIZONTE, BRAZIL
Abstract System ID#: 1179
Individual Paper
HADDAD, Monica [Iowa State University] haddad@iastate.edu
Conditional cash transfer program (CCTs) are common strategies for social protection worldwide. One of the
largest is Brazil’s Bolsa Família (BF) program, which reaches millions of households (Fiszbein et al 2009). BF
provides direct cash transfer to poor families who agree to keep their children in school. However, BF does not
directly help adult recipients find and engage in decent work – work that is safe, inclusive, and respects basic
human rights (ILO 2012). ILO has a specific agenda for decent work that is based on four strategic objectives:
creating jobs, guaranteeing rights at work, extending social protection, and social dialogue. The ILO’s definition
for extending social protection is: “to promote both inclusion and productivity by ensuring that women and men
enjoy working conditions that are safe, allow adequate free time and rest, take into account family and social
values, provide for adequate compensation in case of lost or reduced income and permit access to adequate
healthcare” (ILO, 2012). Since finding and maintaining decent work is a critical step towards eradicating poverty,
it is important to understand how BF beneficiaries interact with the labor market and pursue decent work.
This paper will qualitatively investigate the relationships between BF, employment opportunities, and decent
work in the municipality of Belo Horizonte (BH), the capital of the Brazilian state Minas Gerais. The primary goal
of the paper is to assess how BF beneficiaries are engaging in decent work. This will be accomplished by surveying
BF recipients with two objectives in mind: 1) Determine how BF beneficiaries find and engage in employment

opportunities; and 2) Evaluate whether BF beneficiaries have access to decent work. The BF survey will be
designed to answer the following: 1) What types of income generating work, besides domestic work, are adult
beneficiaries engaged in? 2) What kinds of working conditions do beneficiaries deal with? 3) What issues related
to free time and rest, compensation, and healthcare do these adults face? 4) What is the spectrum of work
opportunities that are available to adult beneficiaries? And 5) What types of complementary employment
programs are available to BF recipients, and how do they utilize them? A total of 650 adults will be surveyed.
An understanding of how CCTs beneficiaries interact with social protection issues in the labor market is
particularly important for the design of poverty alleviation policy and program. However, little work has been
done to understand this issue. Machado et al (2011) quantitatively assessed the implications of BF for the decent
work agenda, and reported various positive findings such as diminishing unemployment and higher wages.
Despite this, Machado et al (2011) points out that “there is room for improvement as regards the design and
implementation of complementary programmes aimed at promoting job and income generating opportunities
for beneficiaries.” The outcomes of this research will help inform policy making to ensure BF is functioning as a
holistic and effective poverty alleviation strategy.
References
 Fiszbien, A. Schady, N. Ferreira, F. Grosh, M. Kelleher, N. Olinto, P. Skoufias, E. 2009. Conditional cash
transfer: Reducing present and future poverty. Washington DC: World Bank.
 International Laubor Organization. 2012. http://www.ilo.org/global/about-the-ilo/decentworkagenda/lang--en/index.htm
 Machado, A. Fontes, G. Antigo, M. Goncalvez R. 2011. Assessment of implications of Bolsa Família
programme for the decent work agenda. Working paper: International Policy Centre for Inclusive
Growth, IPEA, ILO.

Abstract Index #: 401
BUILDING CLIMATE RESISTANT SPACES IN THE INFORMAL SETTLEMENTS OF SOUTHEAST ASIA
Abstract System ID#: 1236
Individual Paper
DANIERE, Amrita [University of Toronto] amrita.daniere@utoronto.ca
Scholars identify a number of reasons why governments in Southeast Asia have been unsuccessful at planning for
climate change  impact. These include poor coordination, lack of monitoring and evaluation, rigidity, lack of
transparency, corruption, and processes through which well-connected individuals (elites) can dominate
community-level planning and governance (Lebel et al. 2011; Manuta et al. 2006; Dasgupta and Beard 2007). At
the same time it is clear that governments cannot be expected to independently solve the challenges of
adaptation for the region’s urban poor. The challenge lies in how governance actors and institutions can improve
adaptive capacities to deal with climate change (Lebel et al. 2011). In urban area, which are characterised by a
diversity of ethnicity, class, and interest, supporting social justice through collective adaptation means that
actions must be framed in terms of rights and governance. The ways in which urban actors can create new
mechanisms of collective decision-making, engagement, and linkages to formal state institutions, remains a
pressing research concern. This paper explores initial efforts to engage traditionally excluded stakeholders from
decision-making around planning for climate change  impact through Shared Learning Dialogues (as described by
Tyler and Moench 2012) and participatory climate data collection in secondary schools in several comminuty in
Thailand and Vietnam. This research is part of the Urban Climate Change Resilience in Southeast Asia Partnership
(UCRSEA) that is funded by IDRC and SSHRC (Canada). We will rely on primary data collection using surveys and
focus groups as well as extensive observation in the city in which are research project is based (including Chiang
Rai and Udon Thani, Thailand and Lao Cai and Ninh Binh, Vietnam).
References
 Stephen Tyler & Marcus Moench (2012): A framework for urban climate resilience, Climate and
Development, 4:4, 311-326




Lebel, Louis and Manuta, Jesse B and Garden, Po (2011): Institutional traps and vulnerability to changes
in climate and flood regimes in Thailand, Regional environment Change, 111, 45-58
Dasgupta, Aniruddha and Beard, Victoria A (2007):Community Driven Development, Collective Action
and Elite Capture in Indonesia, Development and Change, 38:2, 229-249

Abstract Index #: 402
CAN DISASTERS OPEN PATHWAYS TO SOCIAL CHANGE? INVESTIGATING COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
THROUGH PARTICIPATORY METHODOLOGIES AND QUALITATIVE LONGITUDINAL RESEARCH
Abstract System ID#: 1254
Individual Paper
ENGLE, Jayne [McGill University] jayne.engle-warnick@mail.mcgill.ca
Investigating social change is a long-term and often elusive endeavour, particularly in a post-disaster context in a
country of the ‘outer periphery’ of the world economic system (Fatton 2014). Five years after the earthquake in
Haiti, which left more than 220,000 people dead, 1.5 million homeless, and which destroyed most buildings of
central government and thousands of schools, hospitals, and local institutions, the situation remains dire.
Reconstruction has been slow and most Haitians continue to struggle with daily survival. What can be done?
According to many, reconstruction efforts can only succeed through improved collaborations with Haiti’s complex
and resilient social institutions. Likewise, broader international development discourses recognize the
importance of locally-based ‘people-centered’ approaches, ‘participatory development’ and ‘agency’. However,
social institutions in Haiti have substantially eluded conventional strategies of international development, which
often reveal only superficially the macro numbers of development tendencies. Qualitative analyses that
investigate community development in a context-specific and distinctly human way are lacking. Such analyses
are needed in order to reveal patterns of social change in comminuty.
In my doctoral thesis, I investigate NGO-community development collaborations and seek to expose in what ways
they may be contributing (or not) to social change. The principal community of this study is BellevueLamontagne, Haiti where collaborative community development efforts began in the year following the
earthquake when local residents and NGOs discussed strategies for rebuilding their area which had been hit hard
by the quake. Through participatory practices, the community decided on an education-centered approach to
community development that incorporates social enterprise, sustainability initiatives, community health, and
democratic decision-making practices.
My methodology combines case study, participatory approaches, and narrative analysis. This strategy attempts
to give ‘voice’ to comminuty in their struggles to overcome the main barriers to realizing change, including how
relationships of power shape community development and decision-making processes. Consistent with
phronesis research (as in Flyvbjerg 2001), my strategy of inquiry focuses on combining both actor and structural
levels of analysis -- understanding from within and from outside. I use methods of participatory photography,
participatory mapping, community walks, probe-based and household interviews, focus groups, and video
interviews. This research methodology has as its lens participatory and transformative theories that are valueladen by social justice, sustainability, participation, and an ideology of equality (Freire, 1972 and Ledwith, 2011).
Early findings reveal that 1) Participants tend to value community over individual wellbeing, and despite
challenges of everyday survival, people take a long view and hope for a better future for their children; 2) People
feel that their voices have been heard and that they have contributed to shaping community development
decisions; 3) People do not expect the state to act in their interests (such as by providing police protection or
assistance to reconstruct their homes). They expect that positive change can only come about through their
working together with others in the community more effectively and, to a lesser extent, with assistance from
international organizations.
In order to continue learning from people’s lived experiences over time, I have designed this study to enable
qualitative longitudinal research. With this I aim to expose dynamics of social change over the years that will

track conditions, perceptions, and outcomes of participants, their families and local comminuty. I hope to
contribute to improved community development policy, research, and practice in Haiti and broader structural
transformation where citizens’ voices are heard and comminuty are empowered to realize their aspirations for
change.
Video with early research findings: vimeo.com/jayneew
References
 Fatton Jr., R. (2014). Haiti: Trapped in the Outer Periphery. Boulder, CO: Rienner Press.
 Flyvbjerg, B. (2001). Making Social Science Matter. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
 Freire, P. (1972). Pedagogy of the Oppressed: 30th anniversary edition. New York: Continuum.
 Ledwith, M. (2011). Community Development: A critical approach. 2nd ed. Bristol, UK: The Policy Press.

Abstract Index #: 403
URBAN GOVERNANCE IN LATIN AMERICAN HISTORIC CENTERS: CONSERVATION, POVERTY REDUCTION AND
DISPLACEMENT
Abstract System ID#: 1270
Individual Paper
CHEONG, Caroline [University of Pennsylvania] cheongcs@design.upenn.edu
This paper presents research dissertation research that focuses on the interactions between urban heritage
conservation, poverty reduction and displacement. The majority of existing scholarship focuses on these three
themes as separate phenomena that require distinct policy responses and mitigation strategies. By applying a
mixed-methods approach to four case studies in Ecuador – Quito, Ibarra, Loja and Cuenca – this research
identifies the conditions or factors that foster both synergy and disharmony among these three area of practice.
Analysis focuses on the institutional arrangements that shape the past and present social, economic and spatial
configurations of these historic centers, while paying close attention to the way that heritage is configured and
applied in urban governance.
Results from these four city are assessed against a model of successful conservation-based regeneration (CBR),
defined as a process and outcome combining good physical conservation with poverty reduction. Successful CBR
depends on public, private and civic institutions that foster good conservation, economic development –
measured by economic  impact – and regeneration politics that encourage displacement mitigation. This model
prioritizes the values and retention of existing residents by retaining regeneration benefits within local, usually
low-income, comminuty.
The four city in Ecuador represent variation in city size, historic fabric, conservation approach, poverty levels
and policy proscriptions. In all city, government is the primary, if not only, actor involved in guiding the historic
centers with limited, and sometimes nonexistent, citizen involvement. However, the degree of private sector
interest and government-permitted involvement in the historic centers varies amongst the city, playing a
central role in their current architectural, social and economic conditions. In all city, existing policy heavily
favor commercial activity over residential occupation, resulting in residential abandonment and stifling long-term
conservation efforts and quality of life improvements. Further, all city lack, to varying degrees, the necessary
political will and capacity and engagement from the public, private and civic sectors to create and enforce policy
tools and financial incentives to promote conservation and poverty reduction for existing local comminuty. This
is a result of: 1) an imbalanced decentralization process that ceded authority and responsibility to municipalities
but failed to facilitate their ability to generate self-sustaining funds; 2) short-term visioning for historic centers
that prioritizes political support and election cycles over long-term, sustainable, outcomes; 3) the recent
discouragement of citizen engagement; and 4) the conceptualization and application of antiquated conservation
principles that assign values to individual buildings, rather than the urban context, that are based on purely
architectural terms.

Despite these commonalities, the way in which conservation, poverty reduction and displacement interact in
each city remains distinct. Using qualitative interviews of key public, private and nonprofit officials, architectural
surveys, policy analysis and quantitative assessment of census and housing data and the Multidimensional
Poverty Index to include non-monetary components of poverty, this paper presents a theoretical model of how
institutions can better direct conservation interventions that can contribute to poverty reduction and improved
quality of life for existing residents. This includes identifying and crafting effective policy and financial tools within
urban regeneration program to better redirect conservation’s benefits to existing low-income comminuty,
such as public-private partnerships, grant and taxation program, workforce development curriculums and
others. These findings have wide applicability beyond Ecuador, extending to many governments in the Global
South and Global North that are faced with concentrations and colocations of historic buildings and poverty, and
the challenge of balancing urban heritage conservation with development pressures.
References
 Castillo Oreja, M. A., Campesino, A. J., & Macho, M. V. (2000). Ciudades históricas: Conservación y
desarrollo. Madrid: Fundación Argentaria : Visor, Dis
 Lanzame, Francesco & Quartesan, Alessandra (2008). Downtown Poverty: Methods of analysis and
intervention. Washington, D.C.: Inter-American Development Bank
 Licciardi, Guido & Amirtahmasebi, Rana (2012). The Economics of Uniqueness: Investing in Historic City
Cores and Cultural Heritage Assets for Sustainable Development. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank
 Paredes Castro, C., García Vélez, G., Aguirre Cordero, A., & Unesco. (2010). II taller andino para
especialistas y administradores de sitios inscritos o no en la lista de patrimonio mundial: Inauguración
sur de la cátedra UNESCO sobre la conservación, mantenimiento y monitoreo de monumentos y sitios
PRECOM: Cuenca, Ecuador, 30 nov-1, 2 dic 2009. In Cuenca: Universidad de Cuenca.
 Rojas, E., & Lanzafame, F. (2011). City Development: Experiences in the preservation of Ten World
Heritage Sites. Washington, D.C.: Inter-American Development Bank

Abstract Index #: 404
SHRINKING city AND RESOURCE-BASED ECONOMY IN CHINA
Abstract System ID#: 1291
Individual Paper
HE, Sylvia [The Chinese University of Hong Kong] sylviahe@cuhk.edu.hk
With an average annual GDP growth rate of over eight percent in the past 15 years, Chinese city are growing at
a phenomenal pace. However, not every city in this economic agglomerate is expanding; some Chinese city
have stagnant or even negative population growth. Whilst the phenomenon of shrinkage in general may be
attributable to exogenous factors such as globalization and hence the loss of competitiveness in the global
economy, urban shrinkage may also stem from internal factors such as industrial cycle, which is critical to
resource-based city given the possibility of natural resource exhaustion. Accounting for 17% of all city in
China, resource-based city have played a crucial role in China’s economic development. However, these city
have also accumulated many pressing problems such as resource depletion, unbalanced industry structure,
economic downturn, unemployment, and environment pollution. In an attempt to understand shrinking city
in China and to enlighten the design of sustainable development policy for our future city, this study will focus
on the population growth/decline in China’s resource-based city, review the national and local economic
development policy, and report two case studies of Daqing City and Xinyu City, respectively.
References
 Bernt, M. (2009). Partnerships for demolition: The governance of urban renewal in East Germany’s
shrinking city, International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 33, 754–769.
 Bradbury, J. (1984). The impact of industrial cycles in the mining sector: The case of the QuébecLabrador region in Canada, International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 8, 311–331.
 Martinez-Fernandez, C., Audirac, I., Fol, S., & Cunningham-Sabot, E. (2012). Shrinking city: Urban
challenges of globalization, International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 36, 213–225.




Oswalt, P. (2006), Shrinking city, Vol. 1, International research. Ostfildern, Germany: Hatje Cantz
Verlag.
He S.Y. (2014). When growth grinds to a halt: Population and economic development of resourcedepleted city in China. In Harry W. Richardson and Chang Woon Nam (eds.), Shrinking city: A Global
Perspective (pp. 152-168). New York: Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 405
FINANCIALIZED URBAN POLICY AND ITS EFFECT ON SPACE AND PLACE: THE CASE OF SAO PAULO'S CASA
PAULISTA PROGRAM
Abstract System ID#: 1332
Individual Paper
IZAR, Priscila [Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State University] izarpris@vt.edu
For the last two decades, development policy in Brazil has been driven by a neoliberal approach and included
financial liberalization, market deregulation and a greater dependence on private capital for infrastructure
development and public services’ provision (Paulani 2008, Royer 2009, Fix 2011). In the urban sector, policy and
programs have put a great focus on property development and on the creation of new forms of institutional
environments that rely on greater private sector participation and on more complex finance schemes (Rufino
2013). Simultaneously, these development initiatives have not addressed the needs of the most socially and
economic vulnerable groups.
This paper is based on the proposition that the financialization of housing policy and the real estate sector in
Brazil are outcomes of the country’s adoption of a neoliberal approach towards development (Royer 2009, Fix
2011). The financialization of urban policy, which is characterized by the integration of property and financial
markets, has imposed a new logic on housing and real estate development decisions, marked by the prevalence
of exchange values prevail over use values and the growing importance of the financial market in its relationship
with the property market (Fix 2011).
Through a case study of a state level housing and urban regeneration program (the Casa Paulista program)
financed though a public private partnership (PPP), this paper seeks to understand how does the adoption of
financialized housing and real estate development policy affects spatial and social transformations in the
downtown area of Brazil’s financial capital, São Paulo city. Specifically, this paper inquires: first, how does the
adoption of financialized housing and real estate policy affects spatial transformation in São Paulo’s downtown
area, and; second, how does the public sector, the private markets and social actors interact with and respond to
such financialized urban policy.
This investigation will rely on a case study analysis (Burawoy 1998, George and Bennett 2005, Yin 2014) of a the
Casa Paulista PPP. The study will be based on content analysis of field data originated from participant
observation at public meetings and in-depth interviews with representatives of Casa Paulista’s interest groups
(i.e., state and municipal level public officials, real estate sector representatives, members of the local community
and representatives of the organized pro affordable housing movement), as well secondary data such as national,
state and municipal-level legislation concerning the PPP, project documents, and journal and media articles.
This study will contribute to understanding how financialization of urban policy shapes downtown regions of
emerging global city such as São Paulo. The analysis developed here sheds light onto the possible  impact of
financialization on outcomes such as access to adequate housing, city services, and economic opportunities for
different social groups. Moreover, this research will expand knowledge about how financialization both responds
to and recreates uneven development in urban settings.
References
 Chesnais, François. 2002. "A teoria do regime de acumulação financeirizado: conteúdo, alcance e
interrogações." Economia e Sociedade 11 (1): 1-44.






Fainstein, Susan S. 1994. The city builders: Property, politics, and planning in London and New York.
Blackwell (Oxford, UK and Cambridge, Mass.).
Fix, Mariana. 2011. "Financeirização e transformações recentes no circuito imobiliário no Brasil."
IE/Unicamp (PhD Dissertation).
Harvey, David. 1989. The condition of postmodernity. Vol. 14: Blackwell Oxford.
Weber, Rachel. 2010. "Selling City Futures: The Financialization of Urban Redevelopment Policy."
Economic Geography 86 (3):251-274. doi: 10.1111/j.1944-8287.2010.01077.x.

Abstract Index #: 406
FACTORS HINDERING EFFECTIVE INTEGRATED ADMINISTRATION OF REGIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAMS: INSIGHTS FROM KOREA CASE
Abstract System ID#: 1337
Individual Paper
NAM, Yunwoo [University of Nebraska-Lincoln] ynam2@unl.edu
Many nations in the world are facing challenges in restoring economic growth. Each government designs and
implements various stimulus program to facilitate the regional economic development. In doing so, the role of
central government in the formulation and management of local and economic development policy has been a
critical issue in the planning field. Particularly, in the economic hard times, national governments of various
political hues are seeking actively to intervene in the local and regional development.
Economic development program have been an important tool for local and rural development in Korea like any
other countries. Korean government spends a large portion of budget (around 10% in 2008) for community and
regional development program. However, it is noted that the development program of the central government
that impact the regional level are highly fragmented, and that there is no clear mechanism to coordinate various
regional program and initiatives at the local and regional level. The present multiplicity of program and the
fragmentation of implementation system impose unnecessarily high transaction costs on various government
agencies and cause considerable inefficiency.
Considering the cross-edging issues of regional competitiveness, therefore, there is a critical need to develop a
coordinated development approach. It involves the vertical and horizontal coordination of different levels of
government, and local public/private actors.
This study analyzes the governance system of regional economic development in Korea. The aim of this study is
to investigate the factors that cause fragmentation, program overlap, ineffective allocation of public finance, and
barriers to interagency coordination. This work analyzes the institutional aspect as well as implementation
process and behavioral factors. Particular attention is given to the way in which many government program and
initiatives for regional development are implemented, and the current situation that is not able to properly deal
with cross-cutting regional issues. This work also attempts to propose an effective place-based system for
integrated regional development.
The research method of the study includes focus group, survey, field notes, structured and unstructured
interviews, analysis of documents and materials, consultation with local and central government officials. The
interview with those who are responsible for implementing regional program at the local and regional level is
particularly important to analyze the implementation process and behavioral factors. This study also collects
information from the policy professionals, local experts and stakeholders who are engaged in the provision of
regional development program. Surveys are conducted to analyze the problems of implementing regional
development program. By doing so, the researcher can gain a closer insight into the practices of policy process.
This study contributes to the knowledge of governance and intergovernmental relations in regional economic
development policy. The study also provides policy implications for more effective delivery of government
services to meet the local and regional needs. The critical issues raised here are how central government relates

with other institutions at the regional and local level, and how it ensures integration between the organizations
that are responsible for different program at the local and regional level. This study proposes the role of central
government to provide mechanisms to coordinate and integrate government program and policy that are
implemented locally. Individual departments of the central government are able to use integrated structure to
deliver their community and economic development program more effectively and efficiently.
References
 Darbenstott, Mark, 2008. An Effective Overhaul of Federal Economic Development Policy, Economic
Development Quarterly, Vol.22, No.2.
 Robson, B. 2004. Evaluating Local Economic and Employment Development: How to assess what works
among programmes and policy. OECD.
 Stephenson, R. and Jenny Poxen, 2001. Regional Strategy Making and the New Structure and Process for
Regional Governance. Local Government Studies, Vol.27, No.1.

Abstract Index #: 407
THE CONFLATION OF PARTICIPATORY BUDGETING AND PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN PORTO ALEGRE,
BRAZIL: THE CONSTRUCTION OF A WORKING-CLASS MALL FOR STREET HAWKERS
Abstract System ID#: 1346
Individual Paper
PIMENTEL WALKER, Ana Paula [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] appiment@umich.edu
How vulnerable are participatory institutions to partisan politics and market forces? What are the circumstances
under which the redistributive achievements of counterhegemonic forms of urbanization and globalization, such
as the Participatory Budget (PB) of Porto Alegre, are reversible? This paper addresses the political transition of
Porto Alegre’s PB from a mechanism of restraining and managing some of the harshest manifestations of
neoliberal urbanization to a promoter of profit-driven urban development. The most emblematic instance of the
transition is the public–private partnership for the construction and management by a developer of a
marketplace to relocate downtown street hawkers to an enclosed building. Neoliberal restructuring projects have
produced uneven and heterogeneous patterns of development that significantly affect the political economy of
cities, nations, and world regions (Brenner et al., 2010). Public–private partnerships represent the cornerstone of
neoliberal urban governance (Hackworth, 2007, p. 61) because they characterize the changing role of municipal
governments in post-Fordist capitalism: from managers in the delivery of public works and services to
entrepreneurs who effectively seize opportunities for urban economic development (Harvey, 1989, p. 7). Publicprivate partnerships are not exclusively focused on the practices of gentrification and segregation, their efforts
now include mechanisms to profit from informal housing and labor, such as the examples of the construction of
enclosed market places for street sellers demonstrate. This paper also demonstrates how neoliberal program of
public–private partnerships undermine more redistributive participatory practices, such as the PB, by combining
their mechanisms with the older practices rather than eliminating the rival planning tool. The path of the
Camelódromo project from public–private partnership to the PB reveal not the perverse confluence of leftist and
neoliberal participatory projects, as some scholars argue (e.g., Dagnino, 2003, p. 7), but the strategic co-optation
of the former by the latter. Porto Alegre’s right-wing political parties did not have a vision of participatory
democracy to start with and then later embraced the leftist participatory project. Instead, center-right politicians
in Porto Alegre were politically forced to envision a strategy of participatory planning that could incorporate, or
at least manage and contain, the outcomes of municipal socialism through popular participation characteristic of
the PB. I argue that social classes with an investment in the urban question are key actors in developing hybrid
models of neoliberal urbanization. This paper is based on my dissertation fieldwork, which took place from July
2009 through March 2011. Methods included participant observation of PB meetings, archival research of PB
meeting minutes, transcriptions of meetings for the past 15 years, interviews with then current delegates and
councilors and a survey of PB representatives. I also visited the Camelódromo on several occasions to chat, shop,
and observe commerce. This paper provides an analysis of local class interests and strategies regarding the issue
of street hawking in Porto Alegre by contrasting models of participatory planning.

References
 Brenner, N., Peck, J., & Theodore, N. (2010). After neoliberalism? Globalizations, 7(3), 327–345.
 Dagnino, E. (2003). Citizenship in Latin America: An introduction. Latin American Perspectives, 30(2), 3–
17.
 Hackworth, J. (2007). The Neoliberal city: Governance, ideology, and development in American
urbanism. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
 Harvey, D. (1989). From managerialism to entrepreneurialism: The transformation in urban governance
in Late Capitalism. Geografiska
 Annaler, Series B: Human Geography, 71(1), 3–17.

Abstract Index #: 408
THE EFFECTS OF BUS RAPID TRANSIT (BRT) system ON ACCESSIBILITY AND MOBILITY FOR THE POOR: TWO
CASES FROM LATIN AMERICA
Abstract System ID#: 1353
Individual Paper
SCHOLL, Lynn [University of California, Berkeley] scholl.lynn@gmail.com
Disparities in the distribution of costs and benefits of transportation system contribute to and reinforce the
already high levels of inequality in Latin America. In addition, low-income populations often bear the highest
burdens related to negative transportation externalities in city, including longer travel times and higher exposure to
pollution and risk of traffic accidents. While most mobility plans of major city in Latin American include
increasing social inclusion and equity as relevant objectives in the planning and development processes, the tools
for the analysis and evaluation of transportation projects and conditions do not measure, with either specific or solid
indicators, their contribution to the accessibility levels to opportunities and their social implications, particularly
for the most vulnerable segments of the population.
The Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) urban transportation portfolio grown rapidly in recent years, -from just
17% of the transportation portfolio in the early 2000’s (2000-2004) to 33% in more recently (2009 to 2013) –with
roughly half of the mass transit projects devoted to Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) system. Many of IDB funded urban
transport projects include improving mobility conditions and access to employment and service centers as an
objective. However, to what extent the access and mobility objectives for low income populations are being met
is unknown. Further, to date, there is little analysis of how well IDB urban transportation projects are designed to
meet these objectives or the extent to which the indicators established prior to project execution are relevant.
Using stated and revealed preference surveys we examine to what extent two completed IDB supported BRT
projects in the city of Cali, Colombia, and Lima, Peru, have improved mobility conditions and access to
employment and services centers for low-income populations. Although the projects had explicit objectives of
improving mobility for the poor, aside from placing the corridors and/or feeders in or near low-income or poor
neighborhoods, we find that little or no diagnosis of the mobility needs of the poor was conducted to inform the
projects’ design. Moreover, the projects’ planned elimination of the traditional bus services that operated often
times informally and reached far into poor neighborhood, presented a risk in terms of possible unintended
reductions in access to public transit for the poor, particularly in light of the absence of detailed analyses of the
needs of poor populations and major reforms to bus route structuring.
While the poor ride in the BRT system, they do so at lower rates compared to the traditional bus system and
compared to non-poor residents. The BRT system decrease travel times substantially, particularly for longer
trips. However, poor service quality, particularly in peripheral area where the low-income populations are
concentrated have reduced usage relative to traditional transit modes. In addition, gaps in coverage and
integration, as well affordability are barriers for the poor in both city. Increased coverage of services through
feeders and fare integration with informal modes could improve outcomes. Finally, targeted subsidies for the
poor could improve accessibility.

References
 Wachs, M. (2010) Transportation Policy, Poverty and Sustainability. TRR 2163, 5-12.
 Blumenberg, E., and Manville, M. (2004) Beyond the Spatial Mismatch: Welfare Recipients and
Transportation Policy. Journal of Planning Literature, volume 19, Issue 2, Pages 182-205
 Currie, G., Delbosc, A., 2010. Modelling the social and psychological  impact of transportation disadvantage.
Transportation 37(6), 953-966.
 Delbosc, A., Currie, G., 2011. The spatial context of transportation disadvantage, social exclusion and wellbeing. Journal of transportation Geography 19(6), 1130-1137.
 Bocarejo, J. P., & Oviedo, D. (2012). transportation accessibility and social inequities: a tool for identification
of mobility needs and evaluation of transportation investments. Journal of transportation Geography.

Abstract Index #: 409
INTERNATIONAL PLANNING: LESSONS FOR NORTH AMERICAN PRACTICE, THEORY, AND PEDAGOGY
Abstract System ID#: 1374
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session
GANAPATI, Sukumar [Florida International University] ganapati@fiu.edu
CAROLINI, Gabriella [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] carolini@mit.edu
MACEDO, Joseli [University of Florida] joseli@ufl.edu
FANG, Yiping [Portland State University] yfang@pdx.edu
What does international planning hold for lessons in North American practice, theory, and pedagogy?
Traditionally, planning ideas have been studied as a diffusion from North to South, wherein planning ideas from
developed countries are adopted in developing countries. However, there are a range of planning ideas that have
been adopted on the reverse, that is, from the South to the North. This roundtable will explore the range of
planning ideas that migrate from the South to North, and the implications that the diffusion has for North
American planning. Planning scholars have not paid much attention to the reverse diffusion. There are several
examples of such diffusion. From Brazil, the public transportation policy and participatory budgeting processes
have been adopted in urban transit policy and budgeting processes respectively in North America. The
Colombian example of Cyclovia and pedestrian orientation have been adopted by several American city. The
collective lending policy and micro-entrepreneurship of Grameen Bank in Bangladesh has been adopted across
many developing countries as well as by community development banks in the United States. Some innovations
in the developing countries are not yet on the radar screen of American city. The mobile phone payments of MPesa that emerged in Kenya and has transformed payment processes across many African countries have not yet
emerged in the United States. Alternative private mechanisms to public provision of transit has not emerged in
North American city, which is common-place with private licensed bus operators in developing countries;
almost all public transit in American city is still publicly owned. In the context of diffusion (and no diffusion) of
certain planning practices from the developing world to the United States, this panel will explore the following
sub-questions:
a.

b.

c.

What are the range of planning practices that have diffused from the South to the North? In responding
to this question, we will highlight and document the specific examples that have been adopted (and not
adopted) from the South. We will explore the factors that enabled (and hindered) the diffusion and the
specific ways by which the practice was contextualized to the local planning conditions.
How does the diffusion from the South to the North affect the planning theory? We will explore the
theoretical re-framing of planning processes in answering this question. Planning theory principles are
mainly North American centered, in which the spatial differentiation and zoning are based on functional
and formal processes. We will explore how there is increasing recognition of the large scale of informal
processes and the informal city, but have not been recognized in the planning theory discourse.
How does the diffusion inform planning pedagogy? We have come to recognize the importance of
international planning, but much of this pedagogy is centered on a North American lens of how Third
World city are viewed. Such pedagogy has implied that the planning students will have exposure to
practices in the South. However, these courses have rarely dwelt on how the practices in the South are

being adopted in the North. In exploring this question, we will explore specific ways in which we could
enrich the international planning classes to include an element of the reverse diffusion process.
This will be a roundtable which will be sponsored by the Global Planning Educators Interest Group (GPEIG). The
roundtable will bring together the international planning scholars specializing in different regions to explore the
above three questions from those regional perspectives. Tentatively, the planning scholars will include: Gabriella
Carolini (MIT), who will bring the Latin American and African perspective on international diffusion; Joseli
Macedo (University of Florida), who will bring the Brazilian (and Indian) perspectives. Sukumar Ganapati (FIU) will
lead the roundtable with an overview and key questions.

Track 7:  land_use Policy and Governance
Abstract Index #: 410
URBANIZATION AND LOSS OF AGRICULTURAL LAND: A CASE STUDY OF MADISON COUNTY, ALABAMA, 19702010. TESHOME GABRE, PHD AND CONSTANCE WILSON, PHD, DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY AND REGIONAL
PLANNING, ALABAMA A&M UNIVERSITY, NORMAL, AL 35762
Abstract System ID#: 65
Individual Paper
GABRE, Teshome [Alabama A&M University] teshomegabre@yahoo.com
Madison County is one of the fastest growing counties in the state of Alabama. As the county grows
demographically, socially and economically, its degree of urbanization has increased, at the cost of agricultural
land for urban development. The objective of this study is to assess the demographic and socioeconomic trends
of the County and measure the loss of agricultural land of Madison County between 1970 and 2010. The data for
this study were collected from the U.S. Census of Population and Housing 1970-1990, American Community
Survey 2010, County and City Data Book 1988 and 1994, County Data Book 2003, Geolytics Census CD ROM 19702000, the Census of Agriculture 1974-2007. Satellite images of the study area were analyzed with Geographic
Information System to determine the extent of agricultural land loss, and measure  land_use and land cover
changes of the County. Also, the County’s farmers were surveyed to find their perception of the change. The
result of the study indicated that between 1970 and 2010, the City of Huntsville, the largest city in Madison
County has annexed more than 65,600 acres of farmland from Madison County. The County’s population has
increased by 80%, civilian labor force has increased by 147.8%, and housing stock by 149.8%. The survey analysis
also showed that 100% of the respondents believed that Madison County has lost its agricultural land to
urbanization in the last 10 years; and 92.9% of them indicated that the pressure to convert agricultural land to
urban use is faster than ever. Overall, the study showed that between 1974 and 2002, the number of farm
operators declined by 62.1% and 45.4% of the agricultural land of the County was lost to urbanization, while the
State of Alabama and the U.S. lost only 24.9% and 7.7% of their agricultural land, respectively. If this trend
continues, within the next 30 or 50 years, farming can be a thing of the past in Madison County, Alabama.
References
 Alabama Department of Economic and Community Affairs, Office of Water Resources. 2003. Alabama
County Data Book, 2003, 18th ed., Montgomery, 36104
 American Farmland Trust .2002. A Public Opinion Poll about Agricultural Stewardship Retrieved on
7/10/2009 farm bill/docs/FINLWildlifeHab2%20Oct%2014%202002.doc.
 Benfield, F.K., Matthew D. Raimi, and Donald D.T. Chen .2001. Once There Were Greenfields: How Urban
Sprawl is Undermining America’s Environment, Economy and Social Fabric, Natural Resource Defense
Council, Washington, DC, 2005.
 Huntsville Chamber of Commerce .1985. Huntsville Business Report, Vol. 13 No.3 1-3.



Mason, Moya K. 2007. Has Urbanization Caused a Loss to Agricultural Land? 5/29/2009
http://www.moyak.com/papers/urbanization-agriculture.html.

Abstract Index #: 411
AN INTEGRATED MODEL OF  land_use PLANNING FOR ADAPTING TO CLIMATE CHANGE
Abstract System ID#: 77
Individual Paper
GROVER, Himanshu [University of Washington] groverh@uw.edu, presenting author, primary author
BRODY, Samuel [Texas A&M University] sbrody@tamu.edu
 land_use plans are not merely a component of urban development policy, but rather have a causal role in shaping
the future patterns of growth and risk in a community. The power of  land_use planning in mitigation risks from
local natural hazards while promoting a better quality of life for the citizens is well documented in planning
scholarship. However, in recent years traditional  land_use planning has been under attack by researchers for
promoting unsustainable growth patterns that increase community exposure to risks from various natural
hazards. While, a number of researchers have called for effective integration of hazard mitigation in the local
hazard mitigation process, most comminuty continue to plan for growth and economic development even in
the face of increasing risks from natural hazards. In the coming decades, these negative  impact of insensitive
 land_use planning are likely to be further exacerbated by growing changes in the global climatic system. There is
irrefutable scientific evidence to suggest that we have entered a high-risk era of climatic changes that is only
likely to worsen if the global greenhouse emissions are not controlled soon. A growing number of comminuty
across the nation are experiencing unprecedented extreme weather conditions as a result of changes in the
global climatic system. This risk from climate change is further exacerbated by traditional development patterns
that continue to put more people and structures in area likely to be at the greatest risk. Thus, while climatic
change is slowly increasing vulnerability, insensitive development patterns are enhancing vulnerability much
more quickly and at a larger magnitude. Given this scenario it is but imperative that traditional  land_use models
be adapted to meet the changing realities of a changing climatic system.
This research article proposes an integrated model for  land_use Planning that is sensitive to local hazard
mitigation, as well as anticipated changes in the climatic system. This model is based on the argument that land
use planning is one of the strongest tools available to the local municipal governments for guiding future
development in a manner that is accommodates changing climatic conditions and promotes local resilience to
extreme natural hazard events. We argue that existing institutional mechanisms for implementing  land_use plans
are the most appropriate and effective way of implementing climate change adaptation policy. At the same
time, the traditional  land_use planning process is data intensive and lacks flexibility to deal with uncertainties
associated with climate change. Further, the outcomes of traditional  land_use planning process are rigid with
limited opportunity for flexibility in face of changing ground conditions.
This article follows a three-step methodology in development of the proposed model. First, we undertake a
thematic analysis of traditional models of  land_use planning, hazard mitigation, and climate change adaptation.
As part of this analysis we review each of the respective planning models to identify and organize distinctive
components critical to successful plan development. We then, identify linkages and dependencies among the
three planning models through pattern recognition. Thereafter, we validate our analysis through an empirical
evaluation of each of these plans for fifteen comminuty. Finally based on our empirical findings, we propose an
integrated model for  land_use planning.
References
 Bulkeley, Harriet, et al. "Cities and climate change: the role of institutions, governance and urban
planning." Change 28 (2009): 30.
 Adger, W. Neil, Nigel W. Arnell, and Emma L. Tompkins. "Successful adaptation to climate change across
scales." Global environment change 15.2 (2005): 77-86.





Füssel, H-M. "Adaptation planning for climate change: concepts, assessment approaches, and key
lessons." Sustainability science 2.2 (2007): 265-275.
Godschalk, David R. "Urban hazard mitigation: creating resilient city." Natural hazards review 4.3
(2003): 136-143.
Crawford, Jenny, and Simin Davoudi, eds. Planning for climate change: strategies for mitigation and
adaptation for spatial planners. Routledge, 2009.

Abstract Index #: 412
LOCATION OF WAREHOUSES AND environment JUSTICE
Abstract System ID#: 85
Individual Paper
YUAN, Quan [University of Southern California] quanyuan@usc.edu
The concentration of warehousing activities generates vehicle-related externalities including air pollution, noise,
safety risks, and traffic congestion that affect surrounding neighborhood. Existing literature on environment
justice has provided voluminous evidence on the co-location of locally undesirable  land_uses (LULUs) and
disadvantaged people. However, few efforts have been made to link the warehousing location to environment
justice.
I ascribe the possible environment injustice in the siting of warehouses to economic, political and institutional
factors. First, operators tend to locate warehouses in neighborhood with low land values and low-skilled labor
pools to reduce the economic costs. Second, given the externalities associated with warehouses, operators may
prefer to site them in the neighborhood with the least political resistance, in most cases, those dominated by
poor and minority people. Third, the path dependence of zoning spatially constrains the location choice of
warehouses. These three factors are intertwined in the warehousing location process.
Using data of Los Angeles Metropolitan Area in 2009, this study tests the relationship between the distribution of
warehouses and various location factors. Cross-sectional Poisson and Logistic models are estimated with
explanatory variables, including median land value, poverty ratio, minority ratio, and intensities of relevant
zoning types. Transportation accessibility, another important vector of location factors, is also included in the
model. The results support the hypothesis that warehouses appear more frequently in the neighborhood with
lower land values. Nonetheless, warehouses are less likely located in neighborhood with high poverty ratios. It
implies a major difference between traditional LULUs and warehouses that warehouses store valuable goods and
are more sensible of local security. Poor neighborhood are less attractive due to safety risks. In addition, the
relationships between minority dominance and warehousing location are mixed. The logistic facilities are apt to
be concentrated in neighborhood dominated by the Latinos, but not for other minority races. The results also
suggest that zoning exerts great  impact on the location choice of warehouses. The neighborhood with higher
warehousing and manufacturing zoning densities and lower residential coverage are more likely to be the target
locations for warehouses. Finally, among the variables measuring transportation accessibility, only transport
network density plays a substantial role in the location choice of warehouses.
The study provides an overview of how warehousing location relies on the characteristics of local neighborhood,
and tests whether environment injustice exists in the location choice of warehouses with empirical data. The
overall finding suggests that warehousing location is more subject to economic location factors, such as land rent,
transport costs and security risks, than the political benefits from environment injustice. Meanwhile, the path
dependence in the zoning process may further contribute to disproportionate environment burden on the
affected neighborhood. This study provides policy makers and planners a caution of environment injustice in
warehousing location, which mainly derives from economic and institutional factors. More collaboration between
governments and the warehousing sector would help mitigate the externalities associated with warehousing
activities.
References







Durmuş, A., & Turk, S. S. (2012). Factors Influencing Location Selection of Warehouses at the Intra-Urban
Level: Istanbul Case. European Planning Studies, (ahead-of-print), 1-25.
Mohai, P., Pellow, D., & Roberts, J. T. (2009). environment justice. Annual Review of Environment and
Resources, 34, 405-430.
Rondinelli, D., & Berry, M. (2000). Multimodal transportation, logistics, and the environment: managing
interactions in a global economy. European Management Journal, 18(4), 398-410.
Schweitzer, L. (2006). environment justice and hazmat transport: A spatial analysis in southern
California. Transportation Research Part D: transportation and Environment, 11(6), 408-421.
Sivitanidou, R. (1996). Warehouse and Distribution Facilities and Community Attributes: an Empirical
Study. Environment and Planning A, 28(7), 1261-1278.

Abstract Index #: 413
EVALUATING THE PERFORMANCE OF THE GREENBELT POLICY FOR PRESENT AND FUTURE URBAN GROWTH
MANAGEMENT AND environment PROTECTION - A CASE OF SEOUL, KOREA
Abstract System ID#: 92
Individual Paper
HAN, Albert [University of Pennsylvania] alhan@design.upenn.edu
Managing urban growth has been one of the most important  land_use planning concerns for decades. Planners
have invented and implemented various urban growth management tools such as Urban Growth Boundaries,
Priority Funding area, and Greenbelts to control and manage urban growth in various parts of the world.
Originating from the United Kingdom as a legacy of Sir Ebenezer Howard’s Garden City idea, the greenbelt is the
oldest urban growth management tool that gained global popularity during the 20th century. Many national
governments adapted the British ideas including Canada, Australia, South Korea, and the United States (Hack
2012; Amati and Taylor 2010; Daniels 2010).
My research evaluates the performance of the greenbelt in Seoul, South Korea to determine whether it has been
an effective tool. Seoul’s greenbelt offers broad insights about the  impact of a strictly enforced, but modified
greenbelt on such issues as housing affordability, urban form, environment protection, the resolution of
property disputes and other contemporary concerns.
In 1971, Korea instituted its 1,566 km2 (604.6 mi2) greenbelt surrounding Seoul. With this action, the
government aimed to prevent sprawl, protect farmland and ecosystem services, and maintain military
installations. The Korean government maintained this greenbelt for nearly 30 years. In the early 2000s, it relaxed
the regulations, releasing a significant portion (about 10%) of greenbelt lands. The government succumbed to the
escalating development pressures in the city and surrounding region and the intensifying opposition from land
owners who sought to develop their lands, yet it did not give free rein to the private sector to develop all of the
released land (Bae, Jun, and Richardson 2011; Bae and Jun 2003). In the late 2000s, the Korean government
initiated mega-scale residential development projects on the released greenbelt lands to resolve the housing
affordability problems (Korea Ministry of Land and transportation 2010).
This paper includes a performance evaluation of the greenbelt policy pre- and post-relaxation in order to
determine the extent to which the Korean government has managed urban growth. Moreover, the evaluation
provides useful implications for other countries that are considering whether to relax and develop greenbelt
lands. For example, the British government is considering the construction of more than 150,000 homes on the
greenbelt lands near Greater London to accommodate population growth and resolve housing problems (Watts
20:28). Another key objective of my research is identifying and testing alternative greenbelt models. Some
metropolitan counties in the US have incorporated market-based land preservation program and agricultural
zoning to enhance the greenbelt program which has generated some positive outcomes such as more preserved
farmland and higher agricultural productivity (Daniels 2010). I am hypothesizing that this American greenbelt
model will contribute to resolving some challenges of the current greenbelt, and moreover balance the growth
and land preservation in Korea.

The performance of the greenbelts is evaluated using four criteria adapted from the Ingram and Hong’s work on
the evaluation of Smart Growth in America (Ingram and Hong 2009). The evaluation criteria include 1) physical
growth containment, 2) transportation effects, 3) housing affordability, and 4) fiscal costs for community service
provision. This paper uses both quantitative and qualitative methods to evaluate the performance of different
greenbelt models. The modeling outcomes based on the four criteria are used compute the net costs associated
with the different greenbelt models. The outcomes help to test the validity of the government’s decision to
modify the greenbelt policy. This paper then recommends an alternative greenbelt model for better urban
growth management in the Seoul Metropolitan Area.
References
 Amati, Marco, and Laura Taylor. 2010. “From Green Belts to Green Infrastructure.” Planning Practice and
Research 25 (2): 143–55. doi:10.1080/02697451003740122
 Bae, Chang-Hee Christine, Myung-Jin Jun, and Harry W. Richardson. 2011. “7. Greenbelt Policy.” In
Regional and Urban Policy and Planning on the Korean Peninsula, by Chang-Hee Christine Bae and Harry
W. Richardson. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
 Daniels, Thomas L. 2010. “The Use of Green Belts to Control Sprawl in the United States.” Planning
Practice and Research 25 (2): 255–71. doi:10.1080/02697451003740288.
 Hack, Gary. 2012. “Shaping Urban Form.” Planning Ideas That Matter: Livability, Territoriality,
Governance, and Reflective Practice, 33.
 Ingram, Gregory K., and Yu-hung. Hong. 2009. Evaluating Smart Growth: State and Local Policy
Outcomes. Cambridge, MA: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.

Abstract Index #: 414
THE RULES OF RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION: AMERICAN HOUSING TAXONOMIES AND THEIR PRECEDENTS
Abstract System ID#: 100
Individual Paper
HIRT, Sonia [Virginia Tech] shirt@vt.edu
It has been argued for several decades that zoning, the most common instrument of municipal land-use control,
was inspired by West European, especially German policy advances in the late 1800s and early 1900s (Toll 1969).
But if this is the case, why is it that the most ubiquitous category used in American zoning ordinances, the singlefamily residential district, is so specifically American? As recent literature has shown, the single-family district is
not widely used in Germany and other European countries (Hirt 2012). How and why did this US-European
difference in municipal law-making emerge?
The current literature helps us address this question to a limited extent. This is because most of it has been
limited to the domestic arena. Yet restricting studies to one’s own legal system may provide an incomplete
picture of how legal concepts that have become habitual reached their seemingly preordained status. Crossnational juxtapositions, in contrast, help question the “normalcy” of domestic concepts: what is viewed as
“normal” domestically may seem peculiar if considered comparatively. A comparative view also reveals some
limits of the prevailing US explanations. Many explanations for the popularity of zoning make reference to health
and safety. However, these do not help us much in understanding why single-family zones, specifically, acquired
an elevated status in US planning. Whereas health and safety concerns may help us account for the separation of
housing from polluting industry, it is hard to see how either would be necessarily advanced if people in individual
homes are separated by law from those in multi-family housing. Furthermore, even if there were health and
safety benefits, why didn’t they translate into legally mandated housing separation in West European countries,
whose city also experienced the acute health and safety threats brought about by the industrial revolution?
More sophisticated domestically grounded explanations focus on real-estate economics. At least two main
streams of economic theory may be identified in relation to zoning: M. Weiss’s (1987) theory on the key role of
the real-estate industry in pushing forward the zoning agenda, including the creation of pure single-family
districts; and W. Fischel’s (2001) “homevoter hypothesis” on the key role of US homeowners in supporting single-

family zoning as means of protecting their largest financial asset, the home, from depreciation. Both make sense
when we consider the key role played by real-estate interests in the early-20th-century American city and the
fact that at the time, the United States was the leading “nation of homeowners.” But today, when European
home-ownership rates are comparable to US ones, why are zoning-like tools mandating separation by housing
type still largely absent from the European scene?
The paper explores two hypotheses for the particularity of US zoning, which are embedded in the early-20thcentury US socio-cultural context: 1) that in a country with an unprecedented influx of low-class ethnic and racial
“others,” the single- versus multi-family dichotomy reflected widely held views that race and class divisions must
be codified in space, and 2) that pastoral ideals regarding the supremacy of single-family homes were an integral
part of the American experience more so than they were in Europe. These arguments have been individually
discussed in the literature on American zoning. The class and race argument has been advanced by many authors
such as Christopher Silver (1997) and Raphael Fischler (1998). And pastoral ideals, especially the appeal of the
single-family home, have been highlighted by Martha Lees (1994). However, these authors deal only with US
zoning. In contrast, this paper explores the issue comparatively pointing to the contrasting ideological positions
of early European and American experts regarding social mixing and the spatial position of the individual
household in the community.
References
 Toll, Seymour. Zoned American. New York: Grossman, 1969.
 Lees. Martha. “Preserving Property Values? Preserving Proper Homes? Preserving Privilege: The PreEuclid Debate Over Zoning for Exclusively Private Residential area, 1916-1926.” University of Pittsburgh
Law Review 56 (1994): 367-428.
 Hirt, Sonia. “Mixed Use by Default: How the Europeans (Don’t) Zone.” Journal of Planning Literature 27,
no. 4 (2012): 375-393.
 Fischler, Raphaël. “The Metropolitan Dimension of Early Zoning: Revisiting the 1916 New York City
Ordinance.” Journal of the American Planning Association 64, no. 2 (1998): 170-188.
 Silver, Christopher. “The Racial Underpinnings of Zoning in American city.” in urban_planning and the
African American Community: In the Shadows, edited by J. Manning and M. Ritzdorf. Thousand Oaks:
Sage, 1997

Abstract Index #: 415
LOCAL  land_use PLANNING RESPONSES TO HYDRAULIC FRACTURING
Abstract System ID#: 101
Individual Paper
LOH, Carolyn [Wayne State University] cm9329@wayne.edu, presenting author, primary author
OSLAND, Anna [UNC-Chapel Hill] aosland@email.unc.edu
MCELMURRY, Shawn [Wayne State University] s.mcelmurry@wayne.edu
Horizontal high volume hydraulic fracturing (fracking), in which a mixture of water, sand, and chemicals is
pumped thousands of meters underground to extract natural gas in shale rock formations, has become an
increasingly widespread and controversial method of extracting energy resources (Meyer 2012; Negro 2012;
Nolon 2012; Boudet et al. 2014). While the long term costs and benefits of such activity are still a matter of
debate, in the short term fracking has transformed localities across the country almost overnight as drilling and
pipeline operations and their workers arrive in droves.
Because of environment and  land_use concerns, many local governments have attempted to regulate fracking
within their boundaries through zoning, placing them in conflict in some cases with state-level controls that
would strip power from localities to regulate fracking and its  impact (Rabe 2012). The extent to which local
governments may regulate fracking is highly variable by state and legally in flux (Wiseman 2014). Since many local
governments may be unclear about the nature of the risk from fracking (oil and gas companies conducting
fracking have proprietary control over disclosure of the chemicals they inject) (Mitka 2012), the range of local

policy changes to address fracking may vary significantly in size, scope, or effectiveness to the environment
hazards posed by fracking byproducts due to local differences in risk perception (Schafft et al. 2013). Indeed,
many local governments report that they have attempted to regulate or otherwise affect fracking activity
because they do not trust either the state and federal government or the oil and gas industry to adequately
protect their localities from the potential environment and fiscal costs of fracking (Christopherson et al. 2013).
In this study, we ask, what have been the most common policy responses to fracking in local zoning ordinances
and comprehensive plans? Building on the work of Christopherson and colleagues, we expect that, unlike other
technological hazards, fracking has high salience, focuses people's attention and elicits a planning policy
response. Moreover, as general ordinance approaches encounter legal limits on regulating fracking, we expect
that local governments will turn to a  land_use-based approach to retain at least some control over this activity.
We investigate this research question and test our hypotheses with a survey conducted in early 2014 of all
communities that are partially or totally located within shale basins in four states: Colorado, Louisiana, North
Dakota, and Pennsylvania. These four states include considerable diversity in terms of experiences with gas and
oil drilling, state-level policy on fracking, population density, and natural features. This paper will present the
results of the survey.
References
 Boudet, H., C. Clarke, et al. (2014). “Fracking” controversy and communication: Using national survey
data to understand public perceptions of hydraulic fracturing. Energy Policy 65: 57-67.
 Christopherson, S., C. Frickey, et al. (2013). A Vote of "No Confidence". CRP Working Papers, Cornell
University Department of City and Regional Planning.
 Negro, S. (2012). Fracking Wars: Federal, State and Local Conflicts over the Regulation of Natural Gas
Activities. Zoning and Planning Law Report 35(2): 1-15.
 Nolon, J. R. (2012). Hydrofracking: Disturbances Both Geological and Political: Who Decides?
 Schafft, K. A., Y. Borlu, et al. (2013). The relationship between Marcellus Shale gas development in
Pennsylvania and local perceptions of risk and opportunity. Rural Sociology 78(2): 143-166.

Abstract Index #: 416
THE HIGH COST OF BUNDLED PARKING: PARKING AND URBAN RESIDENTIAL RENTS IN THE UNITED STATES
Abstract System ID#: 106
Individual Paper
GABBE, Charles [University of California, Los Angeles] cgabbe@ucla.edu, presenting author, primary author
PIERCE, Gregory [University of California, Los Angeles] gspierce@ucla.edu
CRANE, Randall [UCLA] crane@ucla.edu
Parking requirements are a centerpiece of American  land_use regulation, and reforming these standards is of
interest to many policymakers. Bundled parking refers to parking spaces that are rented or sold as part of the
unit price (McDonnell, Madar, & Been, 2011). In most city today, housing must be built with on-site parking.
While a major justification for reducing or eliminating minimum parking requirements is that it unnecessarily
drives up the price of housing, the effect of bundled parking on housing prices remains poorly understood. To
shed light on this relationship, we ask: What are the effects of parking provision on residential rents? We extend
the literature by analyzing the effects of bundled parking on housing costs for renters in metropolitan area
across the U.S. We employ a nationally representative sample of housing units, the American Housing Survey
(AHS), to rigorously investigate this question.
We approach this question from the perspective that a parking space or two represents a residential amenity,
rather than a housing unit attribute that should be regulated for health or safety reasons (Shoup, 2005). A
burgeoning academic literature has suggested that parking requirements increase housing prices and reduces
supply, thus depriving people of the option to pay less for a unit without parking (Manville, Beata and Shoup,
2013). These empirical analyses use regression models to isolate the value of a parking space within the bundle of

housing attributes. For example, Jia and Wachs (1999) use a hedonic model to test the relationship between offstreet parking and housing prices in San Francisco, finding that the average single family unit with off-street
parking sold for 11.8% higher and the average condo unit with off-street parking sold for 13% higher. Manville
(2013) uses a natural experiment in Los Angeles’s Adaptive Reuse Ordinance and finds that “an apartment with
bundled parking is associated with $200 more in asking rent, and bundled parking with a condo is associated with
a $43,000 increase in asking price.”
There are several mechanisms through which parking requirements act as a regulatory barrier to lower cost
housing. Deakin (1988) and Quigley and Rosenthal (2005) argue that regulation can limit where development
occurs, the density of that development, add standards for lots and buildings, shifts costs from the municipality
to the developer, and create other direct and indirect controls on growth. Despite the well-developed nature of
these independent strands of research, previous research on the relationship between parking supply and
housing costs for renters is lacking. Data for this study are derived from the 2011 American Housing Survey (AHS).
Using the 2011 AHS micro-data, we analyze 32,754 rental units in metropolitan statistical area, statistically
representative of the national housing stock in metropolitan area. To answer our primary research question, we
build a multivariate, hedonic regression model to isolate the underlying equilibrium price for each housing
attribute. In addition to parking variables, our model includes unit quality and quantity characteristics,
neighborhood characteristics, and intra-metropolitan area location attributes.
References
 Jia, W., & Wachs, M. (1999). Parking Requirements and Housing Affordability: Case Study of San
Francisco. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 1685(-1),
156–160. doi:10.3141/1685-20
 Manville, M. (2013). Parking Requirements and Housing Development. Journal of the American Planning
Association, 79(1), 49–66. doi:10.1080/01944363.2013.785346
 McDonnell, S., Madar, J., & Been, V. (2011). Minimum parking requirements and housing affordability in
New York City. Housing Policy Debate, 21(1), 45–68. doi:10.1080/10511482.2011.534386
 Quigley, J. M., & Rosenthal, L. A. (2005). The Effects of  land_use Regulation on the Price of Housing:
What Do We Know? What Can We Learn? Cityscape, 8(1), 69–137.
 Shoup, D. C. (2005). The High Cost of Free Parking. Chicago, IL: Planners Press, American Planning
Association.

Abstract Index #: 417
10 YEARS LATER: WHAT PLANNERS CAN LEARN FROM HURRICANE KATRINA
Abstract System ID#: 163
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session
NELSON, Marla [University of New Orleans] mnelson@uno.edu
REARDON, Kenneth [The University of Memphis] kreardon@memphis.edu
BATES, Lisa [Portland State University] lkbates@pdx.edu
GRAHAM, Leigh [John Jay University] lgraham@jjay.cuny.edu
LOWE, Jeffrey [Texas Southern University] lowejs@tsu.edu
NANCE, Earthea [Texas Southern University] NanceEA@tsu.edu
OLSHANSKY, Robert [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] robo@illinois.edu
WAGNER, Jacob [University of Missouri-Kansas City] wagnerjaco@umkc.edu
August 29, 2015 represents the 10 year anniversary of the levee breaches that flooded New Orleans, leading to
one of the largest rebuilding processes of any U.S. region. In the period during and after Hurricane Katrina,
popular media accounts shocked people who were unaware of the extent of poverty in New Orleans or the U.S.
and could not believe the U.S. had so little capacity to respond to a disaster. In the years that followed, planners
from around the U.S. and beyond came to New Orleans to assist and the focus turned to recovery.

Recent coverage tells varied stories. New Orleans’s population rebounded more quickly than expected but land
loss along the coast continues to threaten coastal comminuty. The region has recovered nearly all of its peak,
pre-Katrina job levels and shows some signs of economic strength (Brookings Institution, 2014), yet New Orleans
ranks 2nd among American city in income inequality and more than 1 in 3 children live in poverty (Mack, 2015).
And while some neighborhood have experienced resurgence—in some cases raising concerns of gentrification
and displacement—others still face widespread blight and abandonment.
This roundtable will include planning scholars who participated in the New Orleans’ recovery efforts to reflect
and interrogate what the planning profession has learned or can learn from the last decade of recovery and
redevelopment in the New Orleans region. It will address the following questions: How did planning shape
recovery and redevelopment? To what extent did planning—or could planning—lead to more equitable or just
outcomes? How did lessons from Hurricane Katrina influence the planning response to Superstorm Sandy? What
needs to change to facilitate more influential planning after disasters and during periods of rapid change?
References
 Brookings Institution. (2014). Metropolitan Monitor, New Orleans, 2014 Q1. Accessed at:
http://www.brookings.edu/research/interactives/metromonitor#/M35380
 Mack, V. (2015). New Orleans kids, working parents and poverty. New Orleans: The Data Center.
Accessed at: https://s3.amazonaws.com/gnocdc/reports/KidsWorkingParentsandPoverty.pdf
 Reardon, K. M., Green, R., Bates, L. K., & Kiely, R. C. (2009). Commentary: Overcoming the Challenges of
Post-disaster Planning in New Orleans Lessons from the ACORN Housing/University Collaborative.
Journal of Planning Education and Research, 28(3), 391-400.
 Lowe, J. S., & Shaw, T. C. (2009). After Katrina: Racial regimes and human development barriers in the
Gulf Coast region. American Quarterly, 61(3), 803-827.
 Nelson, M., Ehrenfeucht, R., & Laska, S. (2007). Planning, plans, and people: professional expertise, local
knowledge, and governmental action in post-Hurricane Katrina New Orleans. Cityscape, 23-52.

Abstract Index #: 418
THE LEGACY OF ZONING AND RURAL HEALTH DISPARITIES IN THE SAN JOAQUIN VALLEY
Abstract System ID#: 188
Individual Paper
ARATA, Heather [University of California, Berkeley] harata@berkeley.edu
Population densities are one way to define rural places, but factors determining who lives where are a complex
and interdependent set of social, political, and economic variables. One often-overlooked variable in where
people live is zoning. Although introduced as a public health strategy for separating industry pollution from
residences, this was for an urban perspective of high-density populations. In contrast, rural area experienced
zoning in a different way from their urban counterparts. In the late 1870s, zoning for agriculture land helped
create rural area in California through the restriction of where people could live. Private developers contributed
to this creation of the rural by building single-family homes that further ensured low-density populations.
Together zoning and low-density development supported the formation of rural area throughout the San
Joaquin Valley. In these area, zoning for agriculture also meant an increased demand for low-waged workers
that was met with federal policy supplying labor from immigration and seasonal workers. Cheap labor and land
continued to be attractive to companies looking for locations for heavy and light industry, and subsequently
concentrated pollution in these area. With zoning ordinances pushing out industry from urban places,
companies looked to rural locations with fewer residents. What defines the rural, such as low-population
densities, made these locations attractive to industry, but also led to an increase of private companies utilizing
cheap land costs and low-density area for polluting industries unwanted in larger urban area. One outcome of
locating industry in rural area was increased public health concerns for rural residents from air, land, and water
pollution. In this way, city planning policy that contributed to creating rural places also contributed to a legacy
of health inequities in the San Joaquin Valley.

Using an environment Justice framework I examine three questions: 1) How have zoning ordinances shaped the
creation of rural places in the San Joaquin Valley? 2) How have these zoning practices contributed to a legacy of
health inequities that persist today? And 3) How can city planning and public health organizations together
address these health inequities? To answer these questions I use historical, content, and text analysis of historic
planning documents and maps along with historical and current US Census data and public health data.
Preliminary findings from this study show zoning in the San Joaquin Valley has contributed to the health
inequities through  land_use decisions, but these decisions become self-reinforcing. Cheap land in rural area has
attracted industries, but this has meant more land, water, and air pollution decreasing land values and increasing
health disparities. Measuring the impact of pollution on health in rural area is difficult because residents are
exposed to many pollutants, but one way is to understand the cumulative impact of various pollutants on health.
Addressing health inequities in the San Joaquin Valley cannot be addressed through city planning or public health
alone, but must include a multi-disciplinary approach that considers the legacy of inequality in the area, and the
effect of cumulative  impact from pollution.
References
 Hutson, M. A., & Wilson, S. (2011). The role of community-based strategies in addressing metropolitan
segregation and racial health disparities. Community Development, 42(4)
 Corburn, J. (2004). Confronting the Challenges in Reconnecting urban_planning and Public Health.
American Journal of Public Health, 94(4), 541–546.
 Morello-Frosch, R., Pastor Jr, M., Porras, C., & Sadd, J. (2002). environment justice and regional
inequality in southern California: implications for future research. environment Health Perspectives,
110(Suppl 2), 149.Roberts JT, Toffolon-Weiss M. 2001. Chronicles from the environment Justice
Frontline. Cambridge, MA/New York: Cambridge Univ. Press
 R Bullard, Johnson GS. environment justice: grassroots activism and its impact on public policy decision
making. J Soc Issues. 2000; 56: 555–578.
 AT Geronimus. To mitigate, resist, or undo: addressing structural influences on the health of urban
populations. Am J Public Health. 2000;90:867–872

Abstract Index #: 419
READY OR NOT: LOCAL  land_use PLANNING AND SUSTAINABLE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Abstract System ID#: 210
Individual Paper
KIM, Hyun Woo [Texas A&M University] kim7230@tamu.edu, presenting author, primary author
LI, Ming-Han [Texas A&M University] minghan@tamu.edu
Since the 1970s, populations increasingly began to reside in suburbs rather than in urban cores in the United
States (Levy, 2011). The rapid and sporadic urbanization eventually increased the percentage of impervious
surfaces and, thus, caused negative hydrologic consequences, including excessive runoff and water quality
degradation (Booth and Jackson, 1997). In particular, the characteristics of watersheds have been deteriorated,
compared to the pre-development flow regime, by decreased peak flow time and baseflow (Brabec, 2009; Paul
and Meyer, 2001). A substantial body of research has been conducted to investigate the  impact of land cover
changes on the watershed responses, including surface runoff and hydrological changes, at the site-scale.
However, there is few, if any, empirical research examining how the planning efforts influence on minimizing
surface runoff.
As part of my dissertation research to understand the degree to which local policy makers and planners recognize
and adopt sustainable stormwater management strategies and policy, an empirical investigation was conducted
through evaluating county comprehensive plans within the Chesapeake Bay Watershed. The watershed covers
166,000 km2 and encompasses six states in the mid-Atlantic region, including parts of Delaware, Maryland, New
York, Pennsylvania, Virginia, Washington, D.C., and West Virginia. The Chesapeake Bay, which is the largest
estuary in the U.S., is a critical area for natural resources, but has been significantly polluted due to stormwater
runoff led by rapid urbanization. This study explores the gap in the empirical research by answering two critical

questions: (1) To what extent have local jurisdictions integrate the key principles of sustainable stormwater
management planning within their comprehensive plan? (2) What are the effects of planning efforts (factors) on
mean and peak streamflow?
To address the research questions, the data was analyzed in two phases. First, an established content analysis
method was used to assess 31 local comprehensive plans; by comparing their plan breadth and depth scores, the
study identified which counties re-examined the past drainage design and  land_use planning tools to create a
sustainable stormwater management system that integrates adaptive implementation strategies to climate
change. Second, a multiple regression analysis was used to examine the degree of association between planning
factors and mean and peak streamflow, by controlling land surface, environment and geographical factors. The
main data of this study are aggregated at the watershed level. Mean annual runoff and peak discharge data are
obtained from the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). Land surface, environment, and geographical data are
obtained from the USGS National Land Cover Dataset (NLCD), the National Hydrography Dataset Plus (NHDPlus),
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), the
Parameter-elevation Regressions on Independent Slopes Model (PRISM) Climate Group, and the US Census
Bureau.
The study finds that most local jurisdictions are likely to have weak  land_use plans toward integrating sustainable
stormwater management principles and policy. Moreover, watersheds with relatively high plan scores tend to
experience more volume of surface runoff, meaning that these local jurisdictions already recognized the flooding
threats and created more clear and specific visions, goals, and policy to mitigate runoff damages. The findings
are anticipated to inform local governments, decision-makers, and planners to increase their awareness and
understanding about the concept of sustainable stormwater management, thus contributing to the improvement
of implementation plans that incorporate comprehensive ecosystem and  land_use planning.
References
 Booth, D., & Jackson, C. (1997). Urbanization of aquatic system: Degradation thresholds, stormwater
detection, and the limits of mitigation. Journal of the American Water Resources Association, 33(5),
1077-1090.
 Brabec, E. (2009). Imperviousness and land‐use policy: Toward an effective approach to watershed
planning. Journal of Hydrologic Engineering, 14(4), 425‐433.
 Paul, M., & Meyer, J. (2001). Streams in the urban landscape. Annual Review of Ecological system, 32,
333–365.
 Levy, J. (2011). Contemporary urban_planning, 9th Edition. Boston, MA: Longman.

Abstract Index #: 420
NEGOTIATING VACANCY IN NEW ORLEANS: THE PLANNER AS FACILITATOR
Abstract System ID#: 248
Pre-organized Session: New Perspectives on the Regulation of Land
VAN MAASAKKERS, Mattijs [The Ohio State University] vanmaasakkers.1@osu.edu
Much of the institutional framework within which planning operates is predicated on the assumption of
development. In city where the population is shrinking, or relocating away from specific area, this raises the
question of how planners can affect positive change without simply advocating for new development to take
place. In addition, the increasing complexity and omnipresence of financial instruments in urban development
makes it difficult to imagine a new or different role for planners in relationship to parcels which, almost by
definition, have little or no financial value for the city. Vacant land typically falls outside of the common financial
infrastructure that drives urban development. This paper seeks to contribute to the literature on planning in the
context of shrinking city, and also aims to engage with the interest in opportunities for planning to improve
spaces and places in a neoliberal context (Campbell et al., 2014). The central question that informs this research
is therefore which role(s) can planners perform in city with high levels of vacant land? The evolution of planning
theory has identified a number of, sometimes overlapping, roles that planners can occupy in urban decision-

making. The comprehensive planner, the advocacy planner and the planner as mediator are all identifiable roles
which practicing planners occupy, sometimes within the same job. The extent to which these roles continue to be
relevant in the context of city with persistent conditions of vacancy, and little or no new development to
review, advocate for or against, or mediate, is not clear. Vacancy is not a new problem in American city
(Bowman and Pagano, 2004; Ryan, 2012), and planners have performed a variety of roles in those city.
However, much of the planning literature on the importance of participation and process (Innes and Booher,
2010) has not been addressed or utilized in the literature on vacancy. This is perhaps the result of the absence of
escalating conflict around vacant parcels, since these typically suffer from a lack of interest, rather than a surfeit.
But it is increasingly clear that vacant land, even when minimally managed, can provide a range of services to a
city and its residents (McPhearson and Kremer, 2013). This raises the question of how planners can support,
enhance and take advantage of these services more effectively. The basic hypothesis is that it is possible for
planners to productively engage a range of stakeholders to build consensus on the development of multiple
(ecosystem) services on vacant parcels in a cost-effective manner. The research methods consist of a series of
semi-structured interviews with planners and stakeholders related to vacant land management and
environmental issues in New Orleans. These interviews were transcribed and analyzed to assess the framing of
vacant land as problematic or potential sources of resources. In addition, we have developed a negotiation
simulation that models consensus building efforts around specific vacant parcels in New Orleans. We have run
this simulation during an interactive workshop, convened by NORA, in New Orleans, with approximately 15
stakeholders. Based on interviews with these stakeholders after the workshop, we were able to compare their
perceptions of vacant land before and after our intervention.
References
 Campbell, H., Tait, M., & Watkins, C. (2014). Is There Space for Better Planning in a Neoliberal World?
Implications for Planning Practice and Theory. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 34(1), 45–59.
 Bowman, A. O., & Pagano. (2004). Terra incognita: vacant land and urban strategies. Washington, D.C.:
Georgetown University Press.
 Ryan, B. D. (2012). Design after decline: how America rebuilds shrinking city. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press.
 Innes, J. E., & Booher, D. E. (2010). Planning with Complexity: An Introduction to Collaborative
Rationality for Public Policy (1st ed.). Routledge.
 McPhearson, T., Kremer, P., & Hamstead, Z. A. (2013). Mapping ecosystem services in New York City:
Applying a social–ecological approach in urban vacant land. Ecosystem Services, 5, 11–26.

Abstract Index #: 421
urban_planning IN THE SUBMERGED STATE: THE CASE OF THE NEW YORK CITY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
CORPORATION
Abstract System ID#: 299
Pre-organized Session: New Perspectives on the Regulation of Land
MARANTZ, Nicholas [University of California, Irvine] nmarantz@uci.edu
Since its inception in 1991, the non-profit New York City Economic Development Corporation (EDC) has become a
pivotal force in the redevelopment of the largest city in the United States. Alternately hailed for its flexibility and
professionalism and derided as an unaccountable, shadowy behemoth, the EDC has served as both a catalyst for
debate about the changing city and as a potential model for new institutions in other city. Although the EDC has
been the object of both exaltation and opprobrium, neither the EDC model nor the reasons for its emergence
have been the subject of detailed scholarly attention. The narratives of industrial restructuring and government
retrenchment that have dominated analysis of urban development in recent decades do not adequately account
for the emergence of the EDC. Although the EDC serves many functions, its core role is that of an intermediary for
the creation of complex financing arrangements. Such arrangements have become increasingly important to
urban development, due to changes in the modalities of spending by the U.S. government and the (related)
increased complexity in U.S. tax law.

As an institution, the EDC both relies on and contributes to the development of what Mettler (2010; 2011) terms
"the submerged state," which filters social policy through the tax system rather than through more visible
mechanisms of government intervention. While the use of tax incentives in urban development has hardly
escaped attention, analysts of urban politics have not treated it as a focal issue in institutional analysis. Yet it
marks a crucial difference between the EDC and earlier importations of private corporate form to urban
government. This article traces the emergence of the EDC in the context of a changing federal system, finding
that shifts in national spending priorities and tax policy have created powerful incentives for local governments to
create the sort of complex financing arrangements that the EDC intermediates. Yet, the form of the EDC owes at
least as much to the gradual and largely haphazard accretion of state and local law, reflecting a persistent intergovernmental struggle over the power to regulate economic resources.
References
 Mettler, Suzanne. 2010. “Reconstituting the Submerged State: The Challenges of Social Policy Reform in
the Obama Era.” Perspectives on Politics 8 (03): 803–24. doi:10.1017/S1537592710002045
 Mettler, Suzanne. 2011. The Submerged State: How Invisible Government policy Undermine American
Democracy. Chicago Studies in American Politics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Abstract Index #: 422
IDENTIFY THE VALUE ORIENTATION AND ROLE OF GOVERNMENT IN URBAN RENEWAL: EVIDENCE FROM
GUANGZHOU AND SHENZHEN
Abstract System ID#: 426
Individual Paper
ZHIHAO, Yao [Tongii University] yaozhihao_tj@hotmail.com
Urban renewal in China can be classified as being in a government-dominated mode. Local authorities typically
operate as the principal players in the affairs of urban renewal. Economic growth for the benefit of local elites,
rather than enhancement of the well-being of local residents, has become the real underlying motivation of
political alliances between local governments and private enterprises (Yan and Fang, 2004; He and Wu, 2005). As
a “rational economic man”, government pursues its maximum interests both in political decision-making and
economic decision-making in the process of urban renewal.Government value orientation towards urban renewal
determines its roles and behaviors in renewal affairs, including determining renovation entities, land
development rights reconfiguration, share allocation over stakeholders and compensation to original property
owners.
Although existing studies on urban renewal in China had noted the significant role government plays in urban
renewal (Li and Li,2011,Liu ,2011,Tian et al,2015), they however, have not adequately addressed why city in
China have different attitude or value orientation on urban renewal, and still lack of in-depth cross-municipal
comparisons . This paper tries to explore the roles and functions of local authorities in urban renewal by
comparing two city in China which displays different characteristics as it relates economy and local public
finance. The paper attempts to clarify two questions: 1) what are the value orientation that Guangzhou and
Shenzhen government holds on urban renewal? 2) What are the determinates on the role of government during
the urban renewal process, in terms of attitude and actions.
We firstly build an analytical framework to illustrate the roles and position government holds on urban renewal,
and depict its public value orientation and private value orientation towards urban renewal. Secondly, we list
main policy tools which are used to realize government’s objects and value in urban renewal process and then
make comparison in value orientation and government’s role in urban renewal programme between two city.
Finally, we deduce the cross-municipal differences between economy, finance and land resource.
The paper employs a mixed method approach that combines literature research and case study. policy
concerning land redevelopment and urban renewal in these two city are collected to analyze the government
value orientation and role. Data such as land leasing, land banking, land value in terms of per unit floor age,

among others are prepared for secondary analysis to interpret cross-municipal difference. We also select
distinctive urban renewal projects which had been investigated previously in Guangzhou and Shenzhen to
illustrate the mode of urban renewal in two idiosyncratic city.
Since government revenue in Guangzhou relies heavily on land conveyance fees, the Guangzhou government is
inclined to apply government-dominated mode in urban renewal to acquire land conveyance fees (Tian, et al,
2015). While, Shenzhen government gives away land development rights to the rural collective, from which the
rural collective makes profit. Shenzhen had realized profit-sharing regime to burden-sharing regime in urban
renewal (Liu,2011).The research indicate that economy development and pattern, land leasing and local public
finance have great influence on government value orientation and its policy in urban renewal. In the process of
transition from developmental state to public service-oriented state, local authorities in China should be more
concerned about the social and public significance of urban renewal, and take responsibility for mediation among
different interests, construct power relations, and link aesthetic imagination with the public interest (Yan and
Fang, 2004).
References
 He, S. J. and Wu, F.L. (2005) Property-led Redevelopment in Post-reform China: a Case Study of Xintiandi
Redevelopment Project in Shanghai, Journal of Urban Affairs,1: 1-23.
 Li, L.H. and Li, X. (2011) Redevelopment of Urban Villages In Shenzhen, China: An Analysis of Power
Relations and Urban Coalitions. Habitat International, 35: 426-434.
 Liu, X. (2011) Role and Responsibility of Shenzhen Government in Urban RedevelopmentFrom Profitsharing Regime to Burden-sharing Regime.urban_planning International, 26 (1):41-45.
 Tian, L., Yao, Z.H., Guo,X.,and Yin,W.(2015) Land Redevelopment from a Perspective of Property Rights
Configuration: Local Practice and Implications in the Backdrop of New Urbanization.City Planning
Review.
 Yan, Z. and Fang, K.(2004)Is History Repeating Itself? From Urban Renewalin the United States to InnerCity Redevelopment in China, Journal of Planning Education and Research, 23: 286-298.

Abstract Index #: 423
WHY DO city VOLUNTARILY ADOPT SUSTAINABILITY policy? A META-REGRESSION ANALYSIS
Abstract System ID#: 558
Individual Paper
STEVENS, Mark [University of British Columbia] mark.stevens@ubc.ca, presenting author, primary author
BERKE, Philip [Texas A&M University] pberke@arch.tamu.edu
Common definitions of sustainability encourage society to strike a balance between economy, environment, and
equity. While city governments have historically prioritized economic growth over other objectives, some have
voluntarily adopted policy that place constraints on unbridled economic expansion in order to foster
development that is more equitable and/or environmently-sensitive. These policy have been given a variety of
different labels, including “growth management”, “sustainable development”, and “Smart Growth” policy.
Cities have also begun to adopt related policy to support global climate change mitigation efforts. We refer to
all such policy as “sustainability policy”.
Economic theories of “rational behavior” suggest that city would be unlikely to adopt sustainability policy
because they might serve to limit economic growth and/or because the local costs of policy adoption might
exceed the local benefits. In response to such theories, scholars from urban_planning, public administration, and
related disciplines have developed separate theories to explain why city have nevertheless chosen to adopt
sustainability policy when not required to do so (e.g. by senior government mandate). Such theories posit that
local (1) government capacity, (2) political culture, (3) organized interest groups, (4) policy innovators, and/or (5)
recognition of environment risk and problem severity are all plausible factors in helping to explain sustainability
policy adoption.

We employ meta-analysis and meta-regression methods to address the question “Why do city voluntarily adopt
sustainability policy?” We synthesize regression model results from 40 separate studies to test five separate
theories of policy adoption and to provide estimated effect sizes for 30 individual factors that have been
hypothesized in the literature to help explain policy adoption. Our effect size estimates are corrected for
potential bias introduced into the literature through selective reporting practices on the part of researchers.
We generally find no more than limited support for each policy adoption theory and that the individual factors
explored in the literature are moderately correlated with policy adoption at best, with many factors showing no
correlation at all once the effects of selective reporting bias have been corrected for. The factor that appears to
show the strongest positive correlation with policy adoption is the presence of a local government staff member
who is specifically responsible for coordinating local activities related to sustainability, energy, and/or climate
planning. Other factors generally believed to influence policy adoption (such as population size and growth rates,
financial capacity, and general planning staff capacity) are found to have no correlation with policy adoption.
Our study is relevant to the planning discipline in the following ways. First, we provide a rigorous synthesis of
disparate findings across multiple studies on the adoption of sustainability policy, which better informs
planners, policy-makers, and researchers regarding the relevant  impact of a wide set of factors on policy
adoption efforts. Our summary of findings highlights the potential role that sustainability planners might play in
promoting local sustainability policy. Second, we introduce a new and evolving methodology to the planning
literature that can be used to test and correct for the biases brought to the literature by selective reporting
practices that are commonly employed by researchers when reporting their results.
References
 Campbell, S. (1996). Green city, growing city, just city? urban_planning and the contradictions of
sustainable development. Journal of the American Planning Association, 62(3), 296-312.
 Ewing, R., and Cervero, R. (2010). Travel and the built environment: A meta-analysis. Journal of the
American Planning Association, 76(3), 1-30.
 Stanley, T. D., and Doucouliagos, H. (2012). Meta-Regression Analysis in Economics and Business.
London New York: Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 424
INDUSTRIAL LAND REVITALIZATION policy WHICH ARE DIFFERENT IN OWNERSHIP, FROM THE PERSPECTIVE
OF FAIRNESS AND JUSTICE: A CASE STUDY OF SHANGHAI SONGJIANG
Abstract System ID#: 569
Individual Paper
HUANG, xiaowen [Shanghai Tongji Urban Panning&Design Institute] 543282027@qq.com, presenting author
WEN, xiaoyi [Shanghai Tongji urban_planning&Design Institute] tjplanner@126.com, primary author
The Ownership of industrial land dramatically varies in China. Transferring, requisition, leasing and renting are all
possible ways of acquiring industrial land. The ownership, tenure and obligations vary dramatically in those ways.
Lands with differentiated ownership are to transfer or renovate when used at low efficiency. The distribution of
benefit gained after a value promotion of lands tends to be controversial. This paper discusses how to renovate
industrial area under the precondition of justice.
The paper will explore the corporate social responsibility and the impartiality principle of increased value
distribution of lands in ownership transferring and compensating of industrial lands with differentiated
ownerships. Relevant findings are intended to offer a guild to facilitate the renovations of industrial area
containing industrial lands of differentiated ownerships under the preconditions of impartiality. The research
focuses on Shanghai Songjiang Economic and Technological Development Zone. The content of this paper mainly
consist of the following four parts: 1, analyzing the differentiations of four types of ownership of industrial lands
under current legal and political framework; 2, estimating the minimum acceptable offerings for developers and
the government and clearly identifying the boundaries between the society, the developers and the government

based on the principals corporate social responsibility and the impartiality principle of increased value
distribution of lands; 3, Seeking differentiated ownership transferring strategies of industrial lands by the case
study and exploring relevant strategies employed during the renovation of Songjiang Economic and Technological
Development Zone concerning transferring benefit from policy, compensations and unification of ownerships.
References
 BARZEL Y. Economic analysis of property rights [M]. Cambridge university press,1989
 Taylor, Charles. “The Nature and Scope of Distributive Justice,” in philosophy and the Human Sciences
[M]. Cambridge university press, 1985.
 Raggi, M., Sardonini, L., Viaggi, D., 2011, The effects of the Common Agricultural Policy on exit strategies
and land re-allocation,  land_use Policy, 2001(31), pp.114-125
 ZHU jieming.Chinese urban development under ambiguous property rights [J]. urban_planning Forum,
2001(6):22-25.)
 Weiwei, Y., 2008, System design of industrial land in land-use change process, CO-Operative Economy &
Science, 2008(17), pp.75-76

Abstract Index #: 425
 land_use PLANNING APPROACHES TO URBAN MANUFACTURING PRESERVATION IN BOSTON, CHICAGO, NEW
YORK CITY AND TORONTO
Abstract System ID#: 587
Individual Paper
WEBBER, Steven [Ryerson University] swebber@ryerson.ca
 land_use planning conflicts continue to emerge in response to redevelopment pressures being exerted on urban
manufacturing locations throughout North America. Real estate interests seeking to capitalize on favourable
market conditions view industrial sites in desirable locations as being better suited for residential and commercial
development and in response request planning redesignations. Conversely, manufacturing proponents view the
focus on highest and best use outcomes as being detrimental to long-term economic development objectives.
Their solution is the implementation of strong land-use planning strategies that preserve sites for current and
future manufacturing-based employment opportunities.
This research utilizes a case study methodology to examine the land-use planning policy and regulations
currently in place to protect industrial land in Boston, Chicago, New York City and Toronto. A qualitative analysis
is completed to examine planning documents and media reports, and key informant interviews are conducted
with local stakeholders to incorporate their perspective into the discussion. Additionally a quantitative overview
of the industrial land situation in the case study city is included for context.
Changing conditions have resulted in modifications to each city’s approach to industrial land preservation. This
research will review the rationale for these revisions and assess the potential  impact on future industrial land
use planning efforts. Briefly, Boston is adopting zoning overlays while supporting its Back Streets program,
Chicago is reviewing the effectiveness of its landmark Planned Manufacturing District zoning designation, New
York City adopted Industrial Business Zones during the Bloomberg administration, and Toronto recently
completed a Municipal Comprehensive Review of its employment lands strategy.
The analysis will focus on key themes that emerged during this research, including: the effectiveness of zoning as
the primary planning tool for protecting industrial land; the influence of the local planning process on industrial
land conversion outcomes; the viability of integrating manufacturing into mixed use developments; and the
disconnect between  land_use planning and economic development.
References
 Chapple, Karen. 2014. The highest and best use? Urban industrial land and job creation. Economic
Development Quarterly 28(4): 300-313.





Howland, Marie. 2010. Planning for industry in a post-industrial world. Journal of the American Planning
Association. 77(1), 39-53.
Leigh, Nancy G. and Nathan Hoelzel. 2012. Smart Growth's Blind Side: Sustainable city Need Productive
Urban Industrial Land. Journal of the American Planning Association. 78(1), pp. 87-103
Lester, Thomas W, Nikhil Kaza and Sarah Kirk. 2014. Making Room for Manufacturing: Understanding
Industrial Land Conversion in city. Journal of the American Planning Association. 79(4), 295-313

Abstract Index #: 426
EXURBAN GROWTH INSIDE THE URBAN GROWTH BOUNDARY? AN EXAMINATION OF RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENT IN URBANIZABLE area IN OREGON
Abstract System ID#: 619
Individual Paper
LEWIS, Rebecca [University of Oregon] rlewis9@uoregon.edu, presenting author, primary author
PARKER, Robert [University of Oregon] rgp@uoregon.edu
The renowned Oregon Statewide Planning Program has been in place for over 40 years. The Oregon approach
requires every city in the state to establish an urban growth boundary (UGB) and adopt a comprehensive plan
addressing the 19 Statewide Planning Goals which must be acknowledged by the Land Conservation and
Development Commission. Oregon state law requires that UGBs have enough land to accommodate 20 years of
population and employment growth. But, all land inside the UGB is not immediately available for urban
development. Land is not annexed to city limits or zoned for urban densities when it is added to the UGB. The
idea is that land will be annexed to city over time, and UGBs will expand over time to ensure there is adequate
land supply for 20 years of growth. This study focuses on the “urbanizable area” – land within the
unincorporated area within the UGB that are reserved for future urban use, but are currently largely
undeveloped and lack urban services.
Since the program’s inception, there have been several studies written about land values, housing affordability,
and development patterns. (Knaap, 1985; Nelson & Moore, 1993; Nelson & Moore, 1996; Jun 2006) Many of
these studies focus on the Portland metropolitan area. In a similar study, Weitz and Moore (1998) examine the
contiguity of development inside the urban growth boundary in four case study city. This study adds to existing
literature on Oregon by examining the pattern of development inside the UGB in a variety of city outside of the
Portland metropolitan area.
Our research focuses on residential development in the urbanizable area. Our study is twofold: First, we will
describe the rate and density of residential density in the urbanizable area. Then, we will assess the institutional
and market factors contributing to observed development in the urbanizable area. Examining 120 city outside
of the Portland Metropolitan area, we use property assessor’s taxlot data and GIS, spatial analysis and regression
analysis to describe and analyze development in the urbanizable area from 1983-2012. Preliminary results show
that, in some city, several taxlots in the urbanizable area are being developed as low density residential
development. The results have important implications for future development patterns and UGB expansions as
low-density development at the fringe of UGBs may constrain available land supply, cause more frequent UGB
expansions and lead to non-contiguous, leapfrog development. We will offer policy recommendations for
limiting low-density residential development in the urbanizable area.
References
 Knaap, G. J. 1985. The Price Effects of Urban Growth Boundaries in Metropolitan Portland, Oregon. Land
Economics Vol. 61, No. 1 (Feb., 1985), pp. 26-35
 Jun, M. 2006. The Effects of Portland's Urban Growth Boundary on Housing Prices. Journal of the
American Planning Association 72 (2): 239-243.
 Nelson, A.C., and Moore, T. 1993. Assessing Urban Growth Management: The Case of Portland, Oregon,
the USA’s Largest Urban Growth Boundary.  land_use Policy 10, 4: 293-302.




Nelson, A.C., and Moore, T. 1996. Assessing Growth Management Policy Implementation: Case Study of
the United States’ Leading Growth Management State.  land_use Policy 13,4 241-59.
Weitz, J. and Moore, T. 1998. Development inside Urban Growth Boundaries: Oregon's Empirical
Evidence of Contiguous Urban Form. Journal of the American Planning Association 64(4): 424-440.

Abstract Index #: 427
THE IMPACT OF URBAN SPRAWL ON THE DECLINE OF INNER CITY: FOCUSED ON THE CAPITAL REGION OF
SOUTH KOREA
Abstract System ID#: 639
Poster
WOO, Myungje [University of Seoul] mwoo@uos.ac.kr, presenting author, primary author
EOM, Hyeun Tae [University Of Seoul] hteom@uos.ac.kr
Recently, many Korean city have experienced an expansion of urbanized area forming metropolitan area.
Such spatial transformation resembles urban sprawl with an excessive geographic expansion and low density
development, resulting in urban problems, such as the decline of inner city that many U.S. metropolitan area
have experienced. While such problems have not been seriously recognized in the capital region of South Korea
due to the strong economic position of the region at the national level, low density single detached homes have
been increasingly developed in outer area of the region similar to the trend of urban sprawl in the U.S. However
little has been known about the impact of the low density development pattern in suburban area on the decline
of inner city in the capital region of Korea.
The purpose of this study is to measure the extent to urban sprawl of the capital region and its  impact on the
decline of inner city. To explore the region, its urban sprawl is measured using urban sprawl indices, and the
decline of the central city, Seoul, is measured using the decline indices of each sub-administrative boundaries
(Dongs) with Seoul. And then, the paper uses a multiple regression model where changes in population and
employment are used as dependent variables and the ratio of population who moved to outer area from inner
cities is used as an independent variable, which represents the extent to urban sprawl, along with other control
variables.
The results show that urban sprawl in the region negatively affects the changes in population in Seoul,
contributing to the decline of inner city area, while the impact of urban sprawl on inner city’ employment is
not statistically significant.
References
 Cutsinger, J., Galster, G., Wolman, H., Hanson, R. & Towns, D. (2005). “Verifying the multi-dimensional
nature of metropolitan  land_use: advancing the understanding and measurement of sprawl”, Journal of
Urban Affairs, 27(3): 235-259.
 Feng, L. & Hui, L. (2012). “Spatial Pattern Analysis of Urban Sprawl: Case Study of Jiangning, Nanjing,
China”, Journal of urban_planning and Development, 138(3): 263-269.
 Frenkel, A. & Ashkenazi, M. (2008). “Measuring urban sprawl: how can we deal with it?”, Planning and
Design, 35(1): 56-79.
 Galster, G., Hanson, R., Ratcliffe, M. R., Wolman, H., Coleman, S. & Freihage, J. (2001). “Wrestling sprawl
to the ground: defining and measuring an elusive concept”, Housing Policy Debate, 12(4): 681-717.
 Woo, M. & Guldmann, J. (2011). “Impacts of Urban Containment policy on the Spatial Structure of U.S.
Metropolitan area”, Urban Studies, 48(16): 3504-3529.

Abstract Index #: 428
NEOLIBERAL policy FOR  land_use AND HOUSING: NEW TOOLS, NEW ARRANGEMENTS OF ACTORS AND
NEW FORMS OF REPEATING THE PAST IN RIO DE JANEIRO.
Abstract System ID#: 640

Individual Paper
CAPANEMA-ALVARES, Lucia [Universidade Federal Fluminense] luciacapanema@gmail.com
Mega-events are the most adopted and powerful neoliberal strategy for city entrepreneuring these days, enticing
large urban restructuring projects. In Brazil, to recreate the structure and the urban image allegedly for such
events, the State and its partners subvert social housing and urban mobility priorities. If the housing problem in
the country is already serious by itself, the making of the 2014 World Cup and 2016 Olympics have added a new
element: megaprojects with extraordinary economic, urban, environment and social  impact, including the
forced eviction of 150,000 to 170,000 people. In Rio de Janeiro, the Panamerican Games 2007 were responsible
for striking changes in  land_use regulations, opening up new real estate fronts targeted at global businesses,
causing forced evictions and total disregard of environment laws. A propos the mega events of 2014 and 2016,
a number of changes in the urban structure has been planned and executed throughout the city, from the port
area through the south to the western and northern area; governments and private capital are proposing large
architectural icons and strategic partnerships, and have adopted new urban marketing strategies. This study
focuses on the neoliberal way of planning adopted in Rio since 1992 and analyzes, through the evaluation of
government plans for the megaproject ”Marvelous Port” and through empirical research, to what extent the
State has been innovating or repeating its housing policy and what  impact they have had on the population.
In addition to a brief historical and bibliographical review, the essay examines enactments and local plans and
presents results of two empirical studies, both undertook by the Graduate Program in Architecture and Urban
Planning of the Universidade Federal Fluminense, Brazil. The first, having a probabilistic character, interviewed
385 protesters of the 2013 riots and collected data on forty variables. The second study did not have a
probabilistic character and was undertaken in downtown Rio de Janeiro, an area currently in evidence due to the
implementation of the “Marvelous Port” Project; it applied 104 surveys with 28 questions to users of public open
spaces. The sample size and the fitness to a normal distribution made statistical inference possible for the
variables studied, hence allowing the consideration of the downtown users’ universe. SPSS 20 was used for
statistical analysis.
The work is relevant to scholars, endangered comminuty and policy makers because it reveals how new
discourses may allow the adoption of old exclusionary practices.
References
 AGAMBEN, Giorgio. State of Exception. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008.
 ARANTES, Otília, VAINER, C. B., e MARICATO, E. A cidade do pensamento único. Desmanchando
consensos (3rd. ed). Petrópolis: Vozes, 2009.
 BAUMAN, Zygmunt. Community (Seeking safety in an insecure world). Polity Press/Blackwell Publishers,
Oxford, 2001.
 BORJA, Jordi e FORN, Manuel. Políticas da Europa e dos Estados Unidos para as cidades. In Espaço &
Debates no. 39. 1996.
 HARVEY, David. Spaces of Capital: Towards a Critical Geography. London: Routledge, 2001.

Abstract Index #: 429
FOOD TRUCKS AS A TOOL FOR INFILL, ACTIVATION OF SPACES, AND MICROENTERPRISES: BARRIERS AND
OPPORTUNITIES
Abstract System ID#: 668
Individual Paper
WIETERS, Kathleen Meghan [University of Oklahoma] kmeghanwieters@ou.edu, presenting author
ELDRIDGE, James [University of Oklahoma] jameskeldridge@gmail.com, primary author
Trailer food vendors are experiencing a renaissance in city like Austin, Denver, Seattle, Atlanta, and many more.
These food venues offer opportunities for small business startups with fewer long term risks associated with
traditional brick and mortar restaurants. From a planning perspective, these trailer food vendors present a

challenge in terms of assessing the appropriate zoning or health codes for these non-permanent  land_uses.
However, these new temporary  land_uses offer a unique way to utilize vacant or underutilized land as well as
‘activate’ public spaces through special street events. This flexible  land_use can foster new economic activity and
diversity of  land_uses with the ability for these businesses to relocate as land values or interests change.
In the literature, establishing active spaces, ones where people want to visit and recreate, often requires a few
ingredients such as diverse destinations, density of population near a space, and a more qualitative variable that
includes sense of place and social attraction (McCormack 2008; Gehl 2011). Many of our city have vacant land,
underutilized parking lots, but also commercial and retail area that seem to lack the luster of energy to bring
people to wander, shop and take part in the space. Food trucks, and other mobile vendors, are a new option in
planning to consider changing places that lack a density of activity with less infrastructure and start-up costs. In
some cases this ‘activation’ intervention is temporary, but in some city these temporary  land_uses in fact
become semi-permanent. This paper will explore how from both the vendors’ perspective and a regulatory code
perspective, how this temporary  land_use can be treated as a tool for both temporary and semi-permanent
invigoration of public spaces and retail spaces. The key questions in this paper are to explore how trailer or
mobile food vendors experience barriers to operation and success and analyze of relevant codes and policy to
suggest best practices for planners. The methods for this study included two phases. The first phase included
qualitative interviewing within the context of one city in the Great Plains region to account for experiences
outside of the coastal and larger metropolitan planning area. This is important for us to be able to assess best
practices for comminuty that may not embrace the same cultural or political ideas from other parts of the
country. The second phase is to review codes and regulations for approximately 20 city to establish best
practices regarding food trucks.
Initial conclusions have identified that some city establish codes to allow semi-permanent establishment of
vendors to occupy vacant or underutilized spaces while others focus on event-based activities that only engage in
the activity for an evening or weekend. Codes or regulations may in fact not be a significant barrier to
establishing a food truck, but planners may consider how to facilitate or encourage these  land_uses in strategic
locations through the code or comprehensive plans.
References
 Cummins, S., M. Petticrew, C. Higgins, A. Findlay, and L. Sparks. 2005. “Large-Scale Food Retailing as
Health Intervention: Quasi-Experimental Evaluation of a Natural Experiment.” J Epidemiol Community
Health 59: 1035–40.
 Gehl, Jan. 2011. Life between Buildings: Using Public Space. Island Press.
 Howell, Alex Matthew. 2011. “Food Trucks as Urban Revitalization Catalysts: Microenterprise, Interim
 land_use and the Food Economy.”
http://repositories.lib.utexas.edu.ezproxy.lib.ou.edu/handle/2152/11902.
 McCormack, Gavin R., Billie Giles-Corti, and Max Bulsara. 2008. “The Relationship between Destination
Proximity, Destination Mix and Physical Activity Behaviors.” Preventive Medicine 46 (1): 33–40.
 Williams, Crystal T. 2012. “Hungry Industry on Rolling Regulations: A Look at Food Truck Regulations in
Cities across the United States, A.” Me. L. Rev. 65: 705.

Abstract Index #: 430
RE-IMAGINING THE SUBURBS IN RESPONSE TO CHALLENGES OF CLIMATE CHANGE
Abstract System ID#: 699
Individual Paper
IVES DEWEY, Dorothy [West Chester University] divesdewey@wcupa.edu
Suburbs are on the forefront of efforts to adapt to climate change in the United States. With the majority of the
U.S. population residing in the suburbs and a high degree of  land_use control vested in local suburban
municipalities, suburbs are poised to play a major role in the effort to adapt to an uncertain future.  impact of
climate change – sea level rise, flooding, warming, etc. – are contingent on local geographic, socio-economic,

biological and hydrological conditions. Many of the potential planning measures to adapt, including  land_use
regulations, building codes, protecting and maintaining critical infrastructure, are in the purview of local
governments. The fragmented local governmental system creates challenges to address a globally-scaled
challenge, but offers an opportunity to engage local comminuty in planning to address climate change
challenges and crafting adaptation strategies that are grounded locally. This research investigates recent
suburban-level efforts in climate adaptation planning in Chester County, Pennsylvania. Based on a review of local
plans, local regulations, and selected municipal case studies, local climate adaptation strategies are analyzed to
identify the nature and extent of efforts and how suburban neighborhood can be adapted to reduce further
impacts of climate change and withstand ongoing change.
References
 Bassett, E. and Shandas, V. 2010. Innovation and climate action planning: Perspectives from municipal
plans. Journal of the American Planning Association, 76(4), 477-495.
 Cruce, T.L. 2009. Adaptation planning: What U.S. states and localities are doing. Arlington, VA: Pew
Center on Global Climate Change.
 Grant, J.L. 2009. Theory and practice in planning the suburbs: Challenges to implementing New
Urbanism, Smart Growth, and sustainability principles. Planning Theory and Practice, 10(1), 11-33.
 Leichenko, R.M. and Solecki, W.D. 2013. Climate change in suburbs: An exploration of key  impact and
vulnerabilities. Urban Climate 6, 82-97.
 Measham, T., Preston, B., Smith, T., Brooke, C., Gorddard, R, Withycombe, G., & Morrison, C. 2011.
Adapting to climate change through local municipal planning: Barriers and challenges. Mitigation and
Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 16(8), 889-909.

Abstract Index #: 431
DISPOSSESSION AND CHINA'S CHANGING URBAN-RURAL DIVIDE: A VILLAGE'S URBANIZATION JOURNEY IN
PERI-URBAN GUANGZHOU
Abstract System ID#: 714
Pre-organized Session: New Perspectives on the Regulation of Land
SHIH, Mi [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] mi.shih@ejb.rutgers.edu
This ethnographic study investigates how China’s recent attempt to construct a model of “coordinated
urbanization (chengxiangyitihua)” is predicated on and realized through rural dispossession. Since the early
2000s, the Chinese central state has imposed intensive waves of institutional, planning, and land reforms on
Guangzhou’s peri-urban villages, which are problematized as an embodiment of the country’s backwards,
socialist urban-rural duality and therefore an obstacle to China’s advancement in urbanization. In Guangzhou, the
municipal state has identified 138 peri-urban villages for comprehensive redevelopment as part of this urban
project. Building on fieldwork research in the province, this article examines the urban regime that the state
intends to create, which comprises an economy based on land commodification, a spatial planning regime in
which the state’s economic restructuring agenda dictates collective  land_use, and a city land system dominated
by state ownership. This ethnographic study, conducted in Duntouji village, shows that villagers’ present
engagement in the redevelopment scheme cannot be separated from the dispossession of the past: loss of
farmland to Guangzhou’s economic development zone in the late 1980s; subjection of collective assets to
industrial  land_use by the planning authority since 1991; the resulting meager collective economic base; on-going
exposure to industrial pollution. These various forms of dispossession, each contingent on the previous,
epitomize two struggles villagers face: a yearning for urbanization complicated by concomitant worries over lost
entitlements associated with the collective, and discomfort with the tradeoff between off-site redevelopment
and continual proximity to environment hazards. This article argues that, while forced relocation and political
conflicts are a less-observed phenomenon in village redevelopment, various forms of dispossession are deeply,
temporally embedded in changing urban-rural spatialities.

References
 J. Chuang. 2015. Urbanization through dispossession: survival and stratification in China’s new
townships. The Journal of Peasant Studies (Published online: 13 Feb 2015)
 G. Arrighi. 2007. Adam Smith in Beijing: Lineages of the Twenty-first Century. New York: Verso.
 H. F. Siu. 2007. Grounding displacement: Uncivil urban spaces in postreform South China. American
Ethnologist, 34(2), pp. 329–350.
 R.E. Karl. 2010. The flight to rights: 1990s China and beyond. Telos, 151, pp.87-104.

Abstract Index #: 432
TDR FOR DEVELOPMENT ENTITLEMENTS: AN ASSESSEMENT OF FLORIDA'S RURAL TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT
RIGHTS program
Abstract System ID#: 738
Individual Paper
LINKOUS, Evangeline [University of South Florida] elinkous@usf.edu
While the planning profession remains concerned with the core challenges of managing growth—including
preventing sprawl, promoting compact development, and protecting resource lands—many of the tools used to
address these issues are increasingly seen as heavy-handed, ineffective, and outmoded (Buitelaar and Needham
2007; Chapin, 2012; Schwartz, 2012; Wright and Czerniak 2000).  land_use planning tools including
comprehensive planning, zoning, and “other elements of police power-based planning” are seen as inefficient
compared to “voluntary, negotiated, financially compensating methods of  land_use control” (Wright and
Czerniak, 2000, page 419). There are questions about the utility of regulatory approaches to growth management
for addressing contemporary planning concerns, such as promoting economic development, protecting property
rights, downsizing government, and facilitating desirable development outcomes like mixed use and infill (Chapin
2012; Nelson 2006).
Dissatisfaction with the processes and outcomes of regulatory  land_use planning has prompted increased focus
on more flexible tools. Foremost among these in the growth management arena are transfer of development
rights (TDR) program, which facilitate a market for the exchange of development rights for the purpose of
redirecting growth to area deemed more appropriate for development. TDR can decrease inefficiencies resulting
from zoning, compensate property owners for property rights restrictions, and leverage private dollars to protect
rural land (Nelson et al., 2012; Preutz 2003).
This study builds on previous research on TDR in Florida that identifies an emerging trend of using TDR to foster a
mix of economic development, environment stewardship, and desirable urban forms in Florida’s rural area
(Linkous and Chapin, 2014). Florida’s rural TDR program are reflective of a larger trend in  land_use policy toward
“multistakeholder collaboration and voluntary market-based mechanisms, designed to forge a compromise
between nature protection, property rights, and local livelihoods (Schwartz, 2012, page 2324). This shift has been
particularly pronounced in Florida, where the state’s 2011 Community Planning Act “rolled back 25 years of
growth management” initiated under 1985 Growth Management Act (Pittman, 2011) in favor of a policy
framework oriented toward economic growth and flexibility in the development process.
Through case study analysis, I find that the flexible, voluntary, and market-based provisions in Florida’s rural TDR
programs 1) enable significant new development entitlements and 2) yield projects that fall short of goals of
creating compact comminuty and limiting sprawl due to non-participation in voluntary options and incentives,
loopholes, amendments, exceptions, and other mechanisms. These findings suggest that, while these program
are intended to support mutual gains for the private and public sectors, Florida’s rural TDR initiatives redesign
 land_use markets to favor private sector opportunities over public growth management goals. These findings
raise questions about the appropriate market framework to use with TDR, and indicate that flexible, marketbased, and voluntary approaches to growth management require further refinement to ensure a more balanced
public-private partnership.

References
 Linkous, Evangeline R. & Chapin, Timothy S. (2014). TDR Program Performance in Florida. Journal of the
American Planning Association, 80:3, 253-267, DOI: 10.1080/01944363.2014.985697.
 Schwartz, K.Z.S. (2013). Panther politics: Neoliberalizing nature in southwest Florida. Environment and
Planning A, 45(10), 2323-2343. DOI: 10.1068/a45294.
 Pruetz, R. & Standridge, N. (2008). What makes transfer of development rights work? Success factors
from research and practice. Journal of the American Planning Association, 75(1), 78-87. DOI:
10.1080/01944360802565627.
 Chapin, T.S. (2012). Introduction: From growth controls to comprehensive planning to smart growth—
Planning’s emerging fourth wave. Journal of the American Planning Association, 78(1), 5-15. DOI:
10.1080/01944363.2011.645273.
 Chapin, T.S. & Higgins, H.T. (2011). Balancing land conservation and land development: The rise and fall
of Florida’s Rural Land Stewardship area program. In T.S. Chapin & C.J. Coutts (Eds.), Growth
management and public land acquisition (pp. 70-100). Burlington, VT: Ashgate.

Abstract Index #: 433
AMENITY MIGRATION AND  land_use PLANNING CONFLICTS
Abstract System ID#: 748
Individual Paper
ONER, Asli Ceylan [Izmir University of Economics] ceylan.oner@gmail.com, presenting author, primary author
VOS, Jaap [Boise State University] jaapvos@boisestate.edu
Amenity migration is the movement of people being attracted to certain locations based on their natural and
cultural amenities, which might cause significant changes and conflicts in the local comminuty with respect to
 land_use, ownership and governance (Gosnell & Abrams, 2011; Walker & Fortmann, 2003). Amenity migration of
elite or middle income groups has mostly been associated with aspirational ruralism (Gosnell & Abrams, 2011;
Cadieux & Hurley, 2011). In planning literature, amenity migration has been studied specifically since 1970s but in
very diffused nature with literature published in journals in natural studies, rural studies, aging, mountain
research, tourism, etc. (Gosnell & Abrams, 2011). These studies mostly focus on upper or middle-class migration
to a rural community for a different lifestyle as “newcomers” either staying seasonally as second homes (Kondo,
Rivera, & Rullman Jr, 2012) or permanently (Smith & Krannich, 2000; Loeffler & Stenicke, 2007; Walker &
Fortmann, 2003; Bryson & Wyckoff, 2010). Woods (2011) point out to the changing trends in amenity migration,
which is that it is becoming increasingly global, engaging these local area in global networks (Woods, 2011).
Globalization and the corresponding information, communication and transportation technologies have introduced
more places and lifestyles to people. Nowadays, people know more about other locations, which increases their
curiosity and willingness to experience different lifestyles based on certain natural and cultural amenities. The
amenity migrants pursue a certain lifestyle and they would like to preserve the existing rural charm. However,
this might collide with the aspirations of the locals, who might pursue economic boosterism in their comminuty.
These different demands on the local landscape may result in  land_use conflicts between amenity migrants and
local population. Based on this, we argue that amenity migration should attract more focused research in
planning literature.
There few existing studies under this framework. Kondo et al. (2012) demonstrate through their case study on
two counties of Washington State in terms of how second homeowners desire for privacy and isolation lead to
certain conflicts over land between long-time residents and newcomers. Woods (2011) examine how affluent
migrant groups would like to protect the existing rural ambiance in Queenstown, New Zealand, by controlling the
development in the region.
In our paper, we are making a call to planners to conduct more research on the dynamics of  land_use planning in
amenity rich area across the world. Each region of the global triad has different dynamics and cross-country
comparison that may add more insights to the specifics of how these localities absorb or resist amenity migration

issues in their planning framework. For this study, we employ a comparative case study approach by analyzing
two cases from the U.S. and Turkey. In the U.S., we focus on Wellington, Florida, a global equestrian node that
attracts super-rich amenity migrants and a well-known great hometown for the upper middle class. In Turkey, we
focus on Alacati, Izmir, which in the recent years have become an important global wind surfing location as well
as amenity-migration hot-spot for affluent groups from Turkey and other countries, which has resulted in
gentrification in this small town.
References
 Cadieux, K. V., & Hurley, P. T. (2011). Amenity migration, exurbia, and emerging rural landscapes: global
natural amenity as place and process. GeoJournal, 76(4), 297-301.
 Gosnell, H., & Abrams, J. (2011). Amenity migration: diverse conceptualizations of drivers,
socioeconomic dimensions, and emerging challenges. GeoJournal, 76(4), 303-322.
 Smith, M. D., & Krannich, R. D. (2000). "Culture Clash" Revisited: Newcomer and Longer-Term Residents'
Attidtudes Toward  land_use, Development, and environment Isues in Rural comminuty in the Rocky
Mountain West. Rural Sociology, 65(3), 396-421.
 Walker, P., & Fortmann, L. (2003). Whose landscape? A political ecology of the 'exurban' Sierra. Cultural
Geographies, 10, 469-491.
 Woods, M. (2011). The locational politics of the global countryside: boosterism, aspirational ruralism and
the contested reconstitution of Queenstown, New Zealand. GeoJournal, 76, 365-381.

Abstract Index #: 434
FACILITATING BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS AND THE POTENTIAL PITFALLS FOR PUBLIC ACTORS
Abstract System ID#: 772
Individual Paper
POULUSSEN, Juriën [Radboud University Nijmegen] jaepoulussen@gmail.com, presenting author, primary author
VAN DER KRABBEN, Erwin [Radboud University Nijmegen] e.vanderkrabben@fm.ru.nl
JACOBS, Harvey [University of Wisconsin-Madison] hmjacobs@wisc.edu
Under the influence of the economic downturn and institutional changes in society, urban development practice
in the Netherlands is shifting away from the traditional top-down, public-sector led development model. Now
alternative forms of urban development, aimed at private-led, so-called ‘organic’ urban development, are
advocated both by Dutch city and the national government. In this new form of urban development public
actors in the development process limit their role in urban development to reducing barriers and facilitating
private initiatives, as opposed to the active role in development they had for multiple decades. One of the
concepts that has been introduced to invigorate the shift in planning is the business improvement district, a
concept for overcoming collective action problems that enables private investment in public space in the built
environment. After six years of experimentation legislation was passed by the Dutch parliament to enable the
creation of business improvement districts. Although the experiments were generally conceived as successful,
the evaluation of the act shows that public actors are unsure how to shape their new role in the urban
development process. Aiming to contribute to existing knowledge and the current application of the facilitating
role of public actors in urban development practice in the Netherlands, a study was conducted in the way public
actors shape their facilitating role in creating and managing business improvement districts in the State of
Wisconsin. Inspired by Healey’s (2006) distinction between hard and soft infrastructure in collaborative planning,
this research hypothesized that facilitating private-led initiatives, like business improvement districts, includes
more than just enabling through legislation. However, the concept of facilitating through soft infrastructure
implies serious considerations for public actors. Through a critical review of literature this paper builds upon this
empirical research and critically reviews the implications of facilitating business improvement districts by public
actors, while arguing that urban public space should be conceived as an urban common. The starting point for
this paper is the empirical research in Wisconsin. The ways business improvement districts are facilitated by
public actors in Wisconsin is outlined and, inspired by Foster (2011), the potential pitfalls of facilitating business
improvement districts are examined. For example, does facilitating private initiatives in the built environment like
business improvement districts create inequality between neighborhood in a city? This paper argues that the

concept of facilitating business improvement districts in general is desirable, but public actors have to keep
considerations of inequality in mind while doing so to prevent inequality between neighborhood in the city in
the longer term.
References
 Briffault, R. (1999). A government for our time? Business improvement districts and urban governance.
Columbia Law Review, 99 (2), 365-477
 Foster, S.R. (2011). Collective action and the urban commons. Notre Dame Law Review, 87, 57-133
 Healey, P. (2006). Collaborative planning. Shaping places in fragmented societies. Hampshire/New York,
New York: Palgrave Macmillan
 Van der Krabben, E. & Jacobs, H.M. (2013). Public land development as a strategic tool for
redevelopment: reflections on the Dutch experience.  land_use Policy, 30, 774-83

Abstract Index #: 435
MUNICIPAL INCORPORATION AS A SOCIAL JUSTICE TOOL? POST-INCORPORATION OUTCOMES IN NEW city
OF COLOR
Abstract System ID#: 820
Individual Paper
WALDNER, Leora [Troy University] lwaldner@troy.edu
Central theme or hypothesis: what research question are you trying to address?
Between 1990 and 2010, 44 new city of color (Black, Hispanic, or Native-American majority) formed for reasons
ranging from improving services to combating nuisances such as locally undesirable  land_uses. What happens
after incorporation, particularly in new city of color that may lack a sufficient tax base? Are residents better off,
or worse off (e.g., fewer services and higher taxes)? Moreover, what strategies do the new city use to address
fiscal and service challenges? Post-incorporation outcomes have not yet been sufficiently studied for new city
of color.
Approach and methodology: how will you address that question?
The research features in-depth case studies of five new city of color (51% or more minority population). The five
cases represent four of the states where new city of color form most frequently, and include two Black-majority
cities, one Hispanic-majority city, and one Native-American majority city. A content analysis of newspaper articles
before and after incorporation was conducted to identify the challenges these new city faced after
incorporation. The study also assesses city budgets, taxation rates, and employee data from local, state, and
federal data sources to determine pre and post-incorporation taxation rates and revenue. Interviews with
respondents from each city provide additional insights regarding post-incorporation outcomes, challenges faced,
and strategies the new city employed to address such challenges.
Relevance of your work to planning education, practice, or scholarship
Communities often incorporate to enhance local governance and control. Scholars have also highlighted the
potential of municipal incorporation as a civil rights tool to ensure comminuty of color and low-income
communities receive equitable service provision. But what happens after incorporation? How does incorporation
change the tax burden and services for residents? Do some residents receive lower services and higher tax
burdens, contrary to their expectations? Without knowing what happens after the city have formed, we cannot
truly assess the social justice potential of municipal incorporation. The research is also critical to boundary
change scholarship, as municipal incorporation literature has not yet examined post-incorporation outcomes for
new city of color. In addition, the research provides practical lessons for comminuty of color considering
incorporation and thus is intended as a social justice tool in and of itself.

References
 Aiken, C.S. 1987. Race as a factor in municipal underbounding. Annals of the Association of American
Geographers 77 (4): 564-579.
 Anderson, M. W. 2008. city inside out: race, poverty, and exclusion at the urban fringe. UCLA Law
Review, 55 (1095).
 Burns, N. 1994. The formation of American local governments: private values in public institutions. New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
 DeHoog, R. H., D. Lowery, and W.E. Lyons. 1991. Metropolitan Fragmentation and suburban ghettos:
Some empirical observations on institutional racism. Journal of Urban Affairs, 13 (4): 479-493.
 Ostrom, V., Tiebout, C. M., & Warren, R. (1961). The organization of government in metropolitan area:
A theoretical inquiry. American Political Science Review, 55(December), 831-842.

Abstract Index #: 436
HOW EFFECTIVE ARE THE GROWTH MANAGEMENT program IN THE UNITED STATES? A META-ANALYSIS OF
EXISTING LITERATURE
Abstract System ID#: 864
Individual Paper
TAGORE, Pratiti [University of Utah] pratiti.tagore@gmail.com, presenting author, primary author
EWING, Reid [University of Utah] ewing@arch.utah.edu
SPAIN, Allison [University of Utah] spain@arch.utah.edu
Since its inception in 1926,  land_use regulation has been by far the most important regulating trend for
addressing a variety of urban problems, one of which is controlling sprawl through the use of growth
management program. Beginning in the 1960s and 1970s, growth management program began to gain
popularity, especially in Oregon, Florida, and Maryland. While the benefits of growth management program
have been touted for decades, with controlling sprawl identified as the “principal spatial objective”, there is little
to no concrete empirical evidence about the effectiveness of growth management program in controlling sprawl
(Bengston et al., 2004; Pendall 1999; Landis, 2006; Carruthers, 1992, p. 391).
Growth Management program vary widely. According to Feiock et al (2008), there are two generations of
growth management program: the first focused on exclusion through growth moratoria and development
restrictions, and the second focus on redirecting growth, not limiting it. We have identified sixteen growth
management tools. The tools in discussion are Tax increment financing, Concurrency (Washington, Florida),
Adequate public facilities ordinance (Maryland), Purchase of development rights / Easements, Priority funding
areas, Open space acquisition / land conservation requirements, Transfer of development rights, Zoning, Density
bonuses, Growth moratoria, Permit limits, Urban growth boundary / Urban service limits, Impact fees, Transit
investments, Road investments and Land trusts.
For example, a study of 695 U.S. city analyzed the effect of impact fees on local capital spending, property taxes
and long-term debts. The study concluded that impact fees were not commensurate to cover costs associated
with new developments and simply acted as a supplemental form of revenue for comminuty. To make up for
the difference, the authors found that municipalities increased capital spending and long-term debt issues. The
authors conclude that while impact fees were associated with property tax reductions the fees themselves did
not represent “powerful tax relief measures” and actually appear to encourage additional development in some
areas (Jung et al., 2009).
We are proposing to conduct a comprehensive literature review on the use of these tools and how they
contribute to the re-densification of urban area and promote mixed use development, street network
connectivity, job density and transit supply (Zhang 2006; Zhang 2010) throughout the United States.
The existing literature provides documentation of various places in the United States, but what is lacking is one
piece of literature that takes an overview of the entire country, following their growth management program,

and taking stock of what tools worked well, and what did not work as well as expected. Peer-reviewed literature
collected shall contribute to a meta-analysis, which will help us draw conclusions about the effectiveness of such
programs across the country. Furthermore, this study shall also help us determine which of the tools are most
effective in reducing sprawl, such that they may be used in later research.
References
 Feiock, R. C., Tavares, A. F., & Lubell, M. 2008. Policy Instrument Choices for Growth Managements and
 land_use Regulation. The Policy Studies Journal 36 (3): 461-480.
 Jung, C., Roh, C. Y. & Kang, Y. 2009. Longitudinal effects of impact fees and special assessments on the
level of capital spending, taxes, and long-term debt in American city. Public Finance Review 37, (5):
613-636
 Landis, J D. 2006 “Growth Management Revisited” Journal of the American Planning Association, volume
72
, Number 4.
 Pendall, R. 1999 “Do land-use controls cause sprawl?” Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design,
volume 26, Pages 555-571
 Zhang, M. 2010. Can transit-oriented development reduce peak-hour congestion? Transportation
Research Record 2148, 48-55.

Abstract Index #: 437
TRANSFERABILITY AND APPLICABILITY OF PORTLAND'S URBAN GROWTH BOUNDARIES IN CHINA: A CASE
STUDY OF SUZHOU CITY, CHINA
Abstract System ID#: 938
Individual Paper
WEI, Dehui [University of Oregon] dwei@uoregon.edu, presenting author, primary author
YANG, Yizhao [University of Oregon] yizhao@uoregon.edu
DENG, Dong [Chinese Academy of urban_planning and Design] deng9393@sina.com
LI, Feng [Suzhou urban_planning and Design Research Institute, LTD.] motan_w1@hotmail.com
Over the next 10 to 15 years, China’s urban population is projected to increase by 150 million and its urbanized
areas to double in size. Many fast-growing Chinese city are in urgent need for strategies to guide urban
development in economically efficient, environmently friendly, and socially just ways. In order to control urban
expansion, fourteen large Chinese city have been exploring the use of urban containment strategies as pilot
efforts encouraged by the central government. One of the fourteen city, Suzhou, is seeking to apply growth
management practices similar to urban growth boundary (UGB) adopted in Portland Metropolitan area.
This research paper aims to study whether Portland’s UGB can be effectively transferred to large city in China
and uses City of Suzhou as a case study. Scholars and practitioners in the urban_planning-related fields have long
studied Portland’s UGB. Research results have indicated that, when bundled with farmland protection, inner city
 land_use planning and regional transportation polices, Portland’s UGB can effectively curb urban sprawl, promote
inner city livelihood, protect surrounding agriculture and forest land, and further increase the attractiveness of
the entire community (Kasowski, 1991; Moore and Nelson, 1994; Nelson, 1992; Song and Knaap, 2004). However,
cities in the US and China differ substantially. Barriers do exist in the adaptation process of the UGB policy in
China.
The project will use literature review, content analyses and interviews with planners and public officials to
identify economic, social, political, and institutional barriers to UGB adoption in China. It will highlight differences
in the planning, policy-making, and implementation processes between the two city (Portland and Suzhou) that
will likely influence the outcomes of UGB applications. At the end, this paper hopes to provide recommendations
on the necessary organizational and technical preparations for UGB adoption in Chinese city. It will also suggest
modifications to Portland’s UGB approach to fit the contexts of Chinese city (e.g.,Suzhou).

References
 Kasowski, K. (Ed.) (1991). Oregon: Fifteen Years of  land_use Planning. Balanced Growth: A Planning
Guide for Local Government. Washington DC: International City Management Association.
 Moore, T. & Nelson, A. (1994). “Lessons for effective urban containment and resource land preservation
policy.” Journal of urban_planning and Development: ASCE, 120(4): 157-171.
 Nelson, A. (1992). "Preserving Prime Farmland in the Face of Urbanization." Journal of the American
Planning Association, 58(4): 467-488.
 Song, Y. & Knaap, G. (2004). “Measuring urban form: is Portland winning the war on sprawl?” Journal of
the American Planning Association, 70(2): 210-225.

Abstract Index #: 438
WHAT TIME IS YOUR PLAN? THE 100-YEAR PLAN AND THE RETHINKING OF THE PLAN HORIZON
Abstract System ID#: 961
Individual Paper
LAMONTAGNE, Neal [University of California, Los Angeles] nlamontagne@ucla.edu
How long should a long-range plan look into the future? The most common time frame or plan horizon of a
comprehensive city plan is 20 to 30 years but what are the implications of using this versus other potential time
frames? This paper builds on case studies of the North Vancouver 100-year Sustainability Vision and the more
recent Official Community Plan (utilizing the 20 year plan horizon), as well as the cityPLUS 100-year plan
prepared for the Greater Vancouver Regional District. The paper examines how time frames public dialogue on
possible futures and explores the role (and conception) of time and the ‘future’ in planning. It concludes with a
contemplation on the possibilities of long-range thinking in long-range planning.
References
 Cole, S. (2001) Dare to Dream: Bringing Futures into Planning in Journal of the American Planning
Association. 67(4): 372-383
 Dyckman (1962) “…Of Time and the Plan” in Journal of the American Institute of Planners. 28(2): 141143
 Myers, D. and A. Kitsuse (2000) “Constructing the Future in Planning: A Survey of Theories and Tools” in
Journal of Planning Education and Research
 Parkes, and N. Thrift (1975) “Timing Space and Spacing Time” in Environment and Planning A. 43: 28012818
 Moffatt, S. (2014) "Resilience and Competing Temporalities in city" in Building Research and
Information. 42(2): 202-220

Abstract Index #: 439
UNTANGLING EMINENT DOMAIN: A CROSS-NATIONAL ANALYSIS
Abstract System ID#: 1010
Individual Paper
ALTERMAN, Rachelle [Technion - Israel Institute of Technology] alterman@technion.ac.il
All governments in the world have legal powers to take land and buildings for public interests – variously defied.
Eminent domain is an American term. The concept is known in other countries as expropriation, compulsory
purchase, compulsory acquisition or similar terminology in different languages. Eminent domain encapsulates in
dramatizes the inherent conflict between the legal expectation in the USA and in many other countries that
property rights be protected on the one hand, and on the other hand, that governments would be able to
achieve their obligation to protect and promote public interests. Conflicts over eminent domain may turn ugly in
the social, political or legal arenas where they occur.

Perhaps because the nerves surrounding eminent domain are often so raw, planning scholarship has generally
shunned this issue, leaving it to legal scholars, political-scientists or econonmists. Yet, planners will have to
continue to resort to eminent domain power (directly or, often, indirectly thought negotiations), Indeed, in
many contexts - both in North America and globally - the range of public purposes for which eminent domain is a
planning instrument seems to expand over time. From time to time, a big eminent domain story captures the
public’s attention, as did the Kelo decision by the US Supreme Court in 2005. Yet even this “big time” case, after
it subsided, did not stimulate enough research.
Eminent domain issues are much more multi-faceted than those addressed in the Kelo case and pose deep
challenges, as well as opportunities, for planners. The paper argues that eminent domain should not be regarded
by planners as a "given”, a force of nature out there. Eminent domain is not monolithic but varies greatly from
state to state, over time, and especially, internationally. Although it is a legal issue, eminent domain should also
be regarded as an issue in which planning scholars and practitioners should engage. To some extent, planners
can help to shape the contours of eminent domain in legislation, practice, and in the court arenas.
The paper first presents a set of parameters for international comparative analysis of differences in eminent
domain regimes. Focusing on the first and second parameters, the paper then applies them to the analysis of
selected Western countries. The parameters include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Degree of constitutional protection of property
Definition of the “public purpose”
Definition of “the public” served
Definition of legitimate operators
Permitted time frames
Linkage with planning regulations
Negotiation and alternatives to ED
Rules regarding compensation

No large-scale and systematic comparative research has been published on eminent domain. There is no data
base on incidences of expropriation, their contexts, or compensation paid. This paper does not purport to fill in
the entire void, but rather to highlight that there are many modes and variations in the law and practice of
eminent domain, and thus alternative formats from which to learn This paper will draw, in part, on the findings
of my study of 13 OECD countries on a related topic – called “regulatory takings” in the USA (meaning diminution
of property values due to planning or other regulations, without transfer of title). These findings will be
supplemented with additional information directly relevant to eminent domain laws and practices in selected
countries.
Even from the limited comparative research available, one learns that there are indeed major differences among
nations and states. Since there is no eminent domain regime that is considered satisfactory by all stakeholders,
there is much room for cross-national exchange of knowledge. To an onlooker, such differences may seem trivial,
but where expropriation is concerned, “the devil is in the detail”. These differences provide rich opportunities for
cross-national learning across countries.
References
 Alexander, Gregory S. (2006) The Global Debate over Constitutional Property: Lessons for American
Takings Jurisprudence. (Chicago University Press)
 Alterman, Rachelle (2010), Takings International. Chicago: ABA Press.
 Christie, Donna R. (2007). A Tale of Three Takings: Taking Analysis in  land_use Regulation in the United
States, Australia and Canada. Brooklyn Journal of International Law Vol. 32 (2), 345-403
 Kotaka, Tsuyoshi and David L. Callies (Eds., 2002). Taking Land: Compulsory Purchase and Regulation in
Asian-Pacific Countries. (University of Hawai'i Press).

Abstract Index #: 440
THE ECONOMIC BENEFITS AND COSTS OF SMART GROWTH: LESSONS FROM FIVE CASES IN METROPOLITAN
CALIFORNIA
Abstract System ID#: 1020
Individual Paper
RAYLE, Lisa [University of California, Berkeley] lrayle@berkeley.edu, presenting author
CHATMAN, Daniel [University of California, Berkeley] dgc@berkeley.edu, primary author
GABBE, Charles [University of California, Los Angeles] cgabbe@ucla.edu
A 2008 California state law (“SB 375”) aims to reduce travel-related greenhouse gas emissions through
coordinated  land_use, housing and transportation policy. Each of the state’s metropolitan planning
organizations was required to adopt a sustainable comminuty plan along with its regional transportation plan.
Adopted metropolitan plans in California now promote infill development, new housing and mixed  land_uses near
high-quality transit, increased  land_use intensity, and preservation of agricultural and resource lands.
Implementing these metropolitan plans is dependent on local  land_use plans and regulations (Barbour & Deakin,
2012). These plans, policy and public initiatives include reduce parking requirements, increased allowable
densities, development incentives, and infrastructure investments. This paper analyzes the economic benefits
and costs of these types of planning interventions in terms of housing prices, commercial property prices,
municipal fiscal  impact and changes in travel behavior.
Few studies have analyzed the  impact of smart growth policy individually and our paper fills a major gap by
analyzing the trade-offs associated with local  land_use interventions. We chose five case studies representing a
breadth of California plans, policy and contexts. These include midtown San Jose in the Bay Area; downtown
Turlock in the Central Valley; the Vermont-Western station area in Los Angeles; and Rio Vista West and
downtown East Village neighborhood in San Diego. We analyzed what occurred in each case between policy
adoption (typically in the late 1990s or early 2000s) and 2010 in terms of population, housing, demographics,
employment, housing rents and sales prices, commercial sales prices, municipal fiscal  impact, and changes in
travel behavior. We combined quantitative analysis, using county tax assessor data, business establishment data,
Census/ACS, household travel surveys and other sources, with interviews and field work at each case study site.
We then constructed a counterfactual scenario reflecting a reasonable expectation of what would have occurred
in the absence of smart growth planning interventions. We analyzed benefits and costs from four perspectives:
societal, municipal, owner households, renter households, and low-income households.
We found that policy in most cases had positive net benefits for the region, municipality, and households.
Benefits varied by case, but generally arose from more efficient infrastructure and public service provision, lower
housing prices due to increased supply, and slight reductions in vehicle travel. In the Vermont-Western station
areas, for example, the plan appears to have shifted some housing and commercial demand to infill rather than
greenfield development, saving the region roughly $5.7 million per year public service costs. The plan’s policy
helped increase revenue for the City of L.A. through higher property tax, sales tax, and one-time impact fee
revenue. The extra revenue outweighed the extra cost of providing services to additional residents. In terms of
housing, by allowing more multifamily housing units, the plan led to a slight price reduction for multifamily units,
generating a benefit of roughly $700,000 annually for households across the region. The additional housing
increased the number of households who could take advantage of the proximity to transit and the increase in
local amenities. Assuming partial capitalization of accessibility and other amenities into housing prices and rents,
local renters would likely benefit about $500 per year, depending on how much they value these amenities. The
plan also had costs which tended to be outweighed by these benefits. The main costs were in the form of higher
development impact fees and property taxes, which are borne by prospective buyers and all households
respectively. Finally, the plan shifted households and jobs to locations with relatively high job and transit
accessibility, leading to a reduction in vehicle miles traveled. In this paper we also compare results across cases.
References
 Barbour, E., & Deakin, E. A. (2012). Smart Growth Planning for Climate Protection. Journal of the
American Planning Association, 78(1), 70–86. doi:10.1080/01944363.2011.645272






Burchell, R. W., A. Downs, et al. (2005). Sprawl Costs: Economic  impact of Unchecked Development,
Island Press
Carruthers, J. I. and G. F. Ulfarsson (2008). "Does 'Smart Growth' Matter to Public Finance?" Urban
Studies 45: 1791-1823.
Duncan, M. (2011). "The synergistic influence of light rail stations and zoning on home prices."
Environment and Planning A 43: 2125-2142.
Song, Y. and G.-J. Knaap (2003). "New urbanism and housing values: a disaggregate assessment." Journal
of Urban Economics 54: 218-238.

Abstract Index #: 441
PRIVATE ADAPTATION PLANNING IN RESPONSE TO PERCEIVED FLOOD RISK: A CASE STUDY OF COMMERCIAL
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANIES IN BOSTON'S DOWNTOWN WATERFRONT
Abstract System ID#: 1035
Individual Paper
TEICHER, Hannah [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] hteicher@mit.edu
In a changing climate, sea level rise and increasing precipitation intensify the threat of flooding in heavily
populated coastal city. Rising seas will amplify storm surges in more frequent, severe storms, triggering periodic
major floods, and amplifying every high tide. At the same time, increasing heavy downpours may overwhelm the
capacity of outdated drainage system. Yet, in the U.S., aside from city such as New York and New Orleans that
have been galvanized by devastating storms, most city are delaying large-scale, coordinated, infrastructural
responses. They are still in a planning phase (Melillo, Richmond, and Yohe 2014). However, in many city,
flooding threatens their central waterfronts, districts that have a resurgent role in economic competitiveness as
commercial anchors and magnets for residential and recreational development (Desfor et al. 2012; Hill 2013).
Now, that very location dedicated to creating value as an economic center, a recreational destination, and a
public amenity threatens value, directly exposing people, infrastructure, and property to the tangible threat of
flooding.
As a continent with high per capita GDP, North America currently has the largest value of exposed assets globally,
with 5 of the top 10 city located in the U.S. In the U.S., flood defense levels are lower by per capita GDP than in
other high-income nations, including England, Japan, and the Netherlands (Hallegatte et al. 2013). Within the
most exposed American city, Boston offers a unique case study for proactive adaptation, based in the lore of
Hurricane Sandy’s near miss; had the storm peaked just 5.5 hours earlier, Boston would have experienced a 100year flood event.
As of the last few years, this risk-related climate change data is beginning to influence the organizational
landscape (Wittneben et al. 2012); faced with potential losses, commercial property management companies
have begun to take note of impending flood risks. In addition, with increasing awareness of Boston’s
vulnerability, the City has established partnerships with business and institutional actors to create more
adaptation capacity. Some property management companies are now developing resilience strategies that
operate at the individual property scale, however collective action is also being contemplated. Strategies at both
the individual and collective scale are examined here for their impact on adaptation resources. At this early stage,
private sector plans could either promote isolated resilience or be leveraged for broader adaptation; scrutiny at
this critical juncture can render this a conscious decision rather than an unintended consequence.
References
 Desfor, Gene, Jennefer Laidley, Quentin Stevens, and Dirk Schubert, eds. 2012. Transforming Urban
Waterfronts: Fixity and Flow. 1 edition. New York: Routledge.
 Hallegatte, Stephane, Colin Green, Robert J. Nicholls, and Jan Corfee-Morlot. 2013. “Future Flood Losses
in Major Coastal city.” Nature Climate Change 3 (9): 802–6







Hill, Kristina. 2013. “Climate-Resilient Urban Waterfronts.” In Climate Adaptation and Flood Risk in
Coastal city, edited by Jeroen Aerts, Botzen Wouter, Malcolm Bowman, Philip Ward, and Piet Dircke,
123–44. Routledge.
Melillo, Jerry M., Terese Richmond, and Yohe. 2014. Climate Change  impact in the United States: The
Third National Climate Assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program.
http://nca2014.globalchange.gov/report.
Wittneben, Bettina BF, Chukwumerije Okereke, Subhabrata Bobby Banerjee, and David L. Levy. 2012.
“Climate Change and the Emergence of New Organizational Landscapes.” Organization Studies 33 (11):
1431–50.

Abstract Index #: 442
COMMERCIAL AND MULTIFAMILY TRANSIT PREMIUMS: A META-ANALYSIS
Abstract System ID#: 1043
Individual Paper
KITTRELL, Katherine [University of Utah] kathy.kittrell@gmail.com, presenting author
HAMIDI, Shima [University of Utah] shima.hamidi@gmail.com
EWING, Reid [University of Utah] ewing@arch.utah.edu
While transit accessibility premiums have been rigorously studied at the local and regional level for over 40 years,
drawing conclusions about premiums at a national scale requires a meta-analysis. Estimating effect size is a
primary purpose of a meta-analysis. Effect size was calculated by Debrezion et al. (2007) using pre-2003 studies.
We recently expanded and updated their work. From over 114 U.S. and Canada single family studies, we chose 53
studies published between 1976 and 2014 for a meta-analysis of single family transit premiums. We found that
overall, U.S. and Canadian studies report premiums for single family houses near transit stations. Our weighted
average discount is 2.3% in distance bands moving away from the transit station, and 0.17% for every 100 feet
distance from the transit station in gradient studies. These results were supported by our hedonic model (Kittrell
et. al., 2015).
This companion paper extends our earlier meta-analysis to multifamily housing, commercial, and vacant land
uses. From previous studies, the highest premiums are for multifamily, commercial and vacant properties. Higher
density properties have the highest potential to create the high density, mixed-use pedestrian environments we
desire in TODs. The most recent meta-analysis for commercial and multifamily properties, published in 2007, uses
a database of 57 studies published before 2003 (Debrezion et al., 2007). The study produced two models but did
not supply effect sizes for individual studies, a major drawback. In this study, more advanced meta-analysis
techniques and the inclusion of 10 new years of studies give us new insights, including much-needed commercial
property information. With over 100 studies now available, a much larger sample of studies can be analyzed. We
compute average effect sizes for 50+ commercial, multifamily and vacant land studies, model effect size in terms
of place-specific variables, and unlike the 2007 meta-analysis, we will present premium estimates for all studies in
the database.
References
 Debrezion, G., Pels, E., & Rietveld, P. (2007). The impact of railway stations on residential and
commercial property value: a meta-analysis. The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 35(2),
161-180.
 Kittrell, K., Hamidi, S., & Ewing, R. (2015). Transit’s value as reflected in U.S. single family home
premiums: A meta-study summarizing 40 years of research. In review.

Abstract Index #: 443
DRIVING FORCES OF THE TRANSITION OF  land_use FROM VACANCY: DEFINING AND ASSESSING THE ROLE OF
LOCAL PUBLIC AUTHORITIES
Abstract System ID#: 1057

Individual Paper
CHIN, Jae Teuk [Saint Louis University] chinj@slu.edu
The housing market crash in 2007 triggered the establishment of land banks across the country. Run by
governmental or nongovernmental authorities, land banks acquire, maintain, and dispose properties that are
vacant, abandoned, or tax-delinquent. A large number of new home foreclosures with underwater mortgages
sparked a national consciousness about foreclosed property and altered policy demands on urban land banks.
Proposed to address the subprime mortgage crisis, the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 (HERA)
expressed a renewal in federal interest in local forms of land banking (Schwarz, 2009). Most land banks are local
agencies that exclusively reflect state statutes, which explains why they have undertaken federal subsidy
programs. New land banks often receive a diverse mix of funding sources from local, regional, and federal level
agencies.
The first generation of land banks in the United States emerged as a response to growing vacancy and
disinvestment in aging urban cores. The goal of these authorities was to leverage land control in order to
promote urban redevelopment while controlling for inflation (National Commission on Urban Problems 1968).
Continued increases in vacancy and sustained population loss burdened existing land banks, exposing problems
with prior legislation and management (Alexander, 2005). While greater awareness of vacant properties and
urban land banks also led to academic research that better aligned with policy implications (Bowman & Pagano
2000; Dewer 2006),  land_use and planning literature paid less attention to evaluating performance of public land
authorities. This paper seeks to understand the role of the public realm in the transition of  land_use from
vacancy, including acquisition strategies and property portfolio management.
To analyze variations in the transition process of  land_use changes, this research used parcel-level  land_use data
between 2008 and 2014 in the city of St. Louis. The ultimate goal of land bank authorities is to revitalize
underused properties by returning them to productive use (Heins & Abdelazim, 2014). Local public authorities
interpret “productive use” in a variety ways including housing construction, job creation, and community
development. This spatio-temporal case study at the block level and at the neighborhood level allows for an
examination of the physical outcomes of the shifts in  land_use patterns that are likely affected by local  land_use
policies and public land authorities. The research will provide evidence of how public interventions play a role in
urban  land_use dynamics through the strategies and plans they can implement.
References
 Alexander, F. S. (2005). Land Bank Authorities: A Guide for the Creation and Operation of Local Land
Banks. New York: Local Initiative Support Corporation.
 Bowman, A. O., & Pagano, M. A. (2000). Transforming America’s city policy and Conditions of Vacant
Land. Urban Affairs Review, 35(4), 559–581.
 Dewar, M. (2006). Selling Tax-Reverted Land. Journal of the American Planning Association, 72(2), 167–
180.
 Heins, P., & Abdelazim, T. (2014). Take it to the Bank: How Land Banks Are Strengthening America’s
Neighborhoods. Flint, MI: Center for Community Progress.
 Schwarz, L. (2009). The Neighborhood Stabilization Program: Land Banking and Rental Housing as
Opportunities for Innovation. Journal of Affordable Housing & Community Development Law, 19(1), 51–
70.

Abstract Index #: 444
EFFECTS OF ELECTED OFFICIALS' PERCEPTIONS OF URBAN SPRAWL ON SMART GROWTH APPLICATIONS
Abstract System ID#: 1073
Individual Paper
ALI, Amal K [Salisbury University] akali@salisbury.edu

Several States have adopted smart growth program to reform local  land_use planning. The incentive based
approach of state program makes their success rely mainly on local government decisions to manage future
growth. Local elected officials adopt  land_use policy that address community needs and problems, and respond
to resident preferences. Therefore, it is important to understand elected officials’ perceptions of urban sprawl
and growth issues, and to explore how these perceptions affect local applications of smart growth policy.
Findings of that examination can help design more effective smart growth program to combat urban sprawl.
The research paper addresses three major questions: how do elected officials perceive their city/town growth?
what are their perceptions of urban sprawl? and how do these perceptions contribute to smart growth
applications to reduce urban sprawl? The research focuses on cites/towns with 10,000 to less than 50,000
inhabitants that are located in the Eastern states. Based on previous studies, I examined three hypotheses to
explore the research questions:
1) Elected officials’ perceptions of their city/town growth vary across comminuty. Most elected officials
perceive their city/town growth as rapid.
2) Elected officials perceive urban sprawl as an important issue that should be addressed by local  land_use
planning.
3) Elected officials’ perceptions of their city/town growth and concerns about urban sprawl affect
applications of smart growth policy. When officials perceive growth as rapid and/or they are
concerned with urban sprawl, they are more likely to adopt  land_use policy to manage their city/town
growth.
To investigate the research questions, I conducted descriptive and multiple regression analyses. The statistical
analysis relied on data collected from two mail surveys. First, I sent a questionnaire to key elected officials
(Mayors or council chairs/presidents) to inquire about their perceptions of their city/town growth and the extent
of their concerns about urban sprawl. Then, I mailed another questionnaire to directors of planning agencies of
cities/towns whose elected officials replied to the first survey. The second survey seeks to collect data about
smart growth policy adopted to reduce sprawl.
Afterwards, I conducted descriptive and multiple regression analyses to examine the research hypothesis. The
dependent variable is an index expressing city/town applications of smart growth policy to reduce urban
sprawl. The explanatory variables are elected officials’ perceptions of their city/town growth (rapid, about right,
slow), and concerns about urban sprawl (important, unimportant). The independent variables include: city/town
population, median household incomes, regional contexts (urban/rural), geographic locations (coastal/noncoastal), governmental forms (mayor-council, council-city manager, other), and locations in a state adopting a
smart growth program.
Findings of the statistical analysis support the research hypotheses. They show significant effects of elected
officials’ perceptions on city/town smart growth applications. Research findings help improve planning practices,
and provide important implications that suggest a bottom-up approach to apply smart growth policy and
combat urban sprawl.
References
 Ali, A. K. (2014). Explaining Smart Growth Applications: Lessons Learned from the US Capital Region.
Urban Studies, 51(1), 116 - 135.
 Brody, S.D., Carrasco, V., Highfield, W.E. (2006). Measuring the Adoption of Local Sprawl Reduction
Planning policy in Florida. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 25, 294-310.
 Feiock, R.C. (2004). Politics, Institutions and Local Land-use Regulation. Urban Studies, 41 (2), 363-75.
 Hawkins CV (2011) Smart Growth Policy Choice: A Resource Dependency and Local Governance
Explanation. The Policy Studies Journal 39(4): 679-707.
 Nguyen M (2009) Why Do comminuty Mobilize against Growth: Growth Pressures, Community Status,
Metropolitan Hierarchy, or Strategic Interaction? Journal of Urban Affairs 31(1): 25–43.

Abstract Index #: 445
ARE PLANNERS’ PERCEPTIONS AND PLAN EVALUATIONS CONSISTENT? A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF  land_use
PLANNING TOOLS IN THE U.S. PACIFIC COAST
Abstract System ID#: 1082
Individual Paper
GE, Yue [North Dakota State University] yue.ge@ndsu.edu, presenting author, primary author
TANG, Zhenghong [University of Nebraska - Lincoln] ztang2@unl.edu
LINDELL, Michael [Texas A & M University] mlindell@tamu.edu
Fifty-three percent of the entire U.S. population lives in coastal counties, yet the land area of coastal counties
accounts for only 17 percent of the entire U.S. land area (Saginor & Ge, 2010). Critical environment challenges,
such as continuing sea level rise, coastal hazards, and coastal ecosystem segmentation, are endangering current
and future coastal development. Nonetheless, coastal area remain hotspots of urban growth and economic
development.
In the densely populated Pacific coastal zones, the state coastal zone management (CZM) program collaborated
with other state and/or local governments and made improvements to  land_use planning and hazard mitigation.
Local jurisdictions have utilized a variety of  land_use planning tools to shape the coastal living environment,
including development policy and regulations, building standards, property acquisition program, incentive
tools, information dissemination strategies, critical and public facilities policy, financial tools, and private-sector
initiatives (Ge, 2013; Tang et al., 2011).
Central Theme and Methodology
An important issue when considering  land_use planning tools is the evaluation of a plan’s quality in terms of how
effectively these planning techniques are utilized to handle local growth problems. Tang et al. (2011) collected
coastal zone  land_use plans from fifty-three Pacific coastal counties and measured the plan quality with a
protocol of five plan components – factual basis, goals and objectives, policy, tools, and strategies, interorganizational coordination, and implementation and monitoring (Brody, 2003; Tang, 2008). Although
representing the linchpin of a plan, policy, tools, and strategies received the second lowest rating among all
plan components. In comparison, Ge (2013) noted that plan making process is partially determined by planners’
perceptions of the attributes of the planning tools – effectiveness, cost, and implementation barriers – available
for use in their jurisdictions. It surveyed urban planners from fifty-eight Pacific coastal counties and implied that
they had moderately positive perceptions of all these planning tools which were rated effective and feasible but
moderately costly.
There are some common findings across the two studies. A significant message is that jurisdictional
characteristics were not associated with either the overall plan quality or the overall desirability indexes of
planning tools, with one exception of planning agency’s capacity. However, one can expect more divergent
results from the two interrelated studies after matching a CZM plan with a corresponding urban planner for a
same coastal county. The thirty-five matched Pacific coastal counties provided the sample for the following
comparative analyses on the consistencies of the two evaluative methods about  land_use planning tools.
First, given the two different conclusions about the overall utility of  land_use planning tools evaluated from the
CZM plans (very low quality) and urban planners (moderately positive perceptions), a set of crosstabs will be
constructed to seek the planning tools that are evaluated differently by the two methodologies regarding three
tool attributes (i.e., effectiveness, cost, and implementation barriers) and two dimensions of plan components
(i.e., breadth and depth). Second, after aggregating the county-level data to the state level, another series of
comparative analyses will be conducted about these evaluative criteria across the five Pacific states. Last, using
the overall plan quality score summed up from the five plan components as a proxy for the planning agencies’
commitment, comparisons will be made to identify any variation between the two studies.
Relevance to planning education, practice, or scholarship

The overarching goal for the comparisons is to better understand the gap between the planners’ preference of
 land_use planning tools and the actual adoption of these tools in local CZM plans. This binary planning evaluation
method could be further tested with other types of plans and generalized to other geographical area.
References
 Brody, S.D. (2003). Implementing the principles of ecosystem management through local comprehensive
 land_use planning. Population & Environment, 24(6), 511-540.
 Ge, Y. (2013). Planners’ perceptions of  land_use planning tools in the U.S. Pacific States. Dissertation.
College Station, TX: Department of Landscape Architecture and urban_planning, Texas A&M University.
 Saginor, J., & Ge, Y. (2010). Do hurricanes matter? A case study of the residential real estate market in
Brunswick County, North Carolina. A research report. College Station, TX: Hazard Reduction and
Recovery Center, Texas A&M University.
 Tang, Z. (2008). Evaluating the capacities of local jurisdictions’ coastal zone  land_use planning in
California. Ocean and Coastal Management, 51(7), 544-555.
 Tang, Z., Lindell, M.K., Prater, C.S., Wei, T., & Hussey, C.M. (2011). Examining local coastal zone  land_use
planning capacity in Pacific coastal counties. Coastal Management, 39, 105-132.

Abstract Index #: 446
DOING RESEARCH FOR COMMUNITY BENEFIT
Abstract System ID#: 1128
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session
COOPER, John [Texas A&M University] jcooper@arch.tamu.edu
BROWN WILSON, Barbara [University of Texas at Austin] bbwilson@austin.utexas.edu
GOUGH, Meghan [Virginia Commonwealth University] mzgough@vcu.edu
MUELLER, Elizabeth [University of Texas at Austin] ejmueller@austin.utexas.edu
Researchers operating in universities are rewarded for pursuing research that is aimed at a national audience and
employs rigorous methods. At the same time, as teachers and members of our comminuty, we are compelled
to work on projects that matter to our comminuty. Often these are the sorts of projects we engage our
students in through practicums or studio courses. They are applied, highly tied to local context and focused on
their local impact rather than their generalizability. They may even help shape local policy or community
initiatives, taking an active rather than neutral role in these efforts.
The participants in this roundtable will reflect on their experience doing community-focused research.
Organizing questions will include:
1) Challenges to/strategies for building and sustaining community partnerships
2) Advocating (vs evaluating) alternatives
3) Negotiating the tensions between student learning and research products
4) Dealing with the semester timeline
5) Student roles/leadership in projects
6) Institutional support/pitfalls
References
 D. Schon, Educating the reflective practitioner: Toward a new design for teaching and learning in the
professions. 1987.
 Forsyth, H. Lu, P. 2000. Service learning in an urban context. Journal of Architecture and Planning
Research, 17, 3.
 J. G. Long. 2012. State of the studio: Revisiting the potential of studio pedagogy in U.S.-based planning
programs. Journal of Planning education and research, 32. 4.
 K. Reardon. 1998. Participatory action research as service learning. ch 7 in New directions for teaching
and learning, 73.

Abstract Index #: 447
DENSITY BONUS POLICY IN THE CITY OF TORONTO: ANALYSIS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CHANGE
Abstract System ID#: 1156
Individual Paper
AMBORSKI, David [Ryerson University] amborski@ryerson.ca
A number of major city in North America including New York and Chicago have implemented density bonus
polices. This group includes Canadian city such as Vancouver and Toronto. The application in Toronto, and the
surrounding jurisdictions in Ontario are applied under Section 37 of the Ontario Planning Act. The longest running
and greatest number of applications have been undertaken in the city of Toronto. More recently surrounding
jurisdictions such as Vaughan, Burlington and Oakville have adopted Section 37 policy applications.
The approach applied in Toronto has been controversial in terms of equity and transparency. This has also led to
concerns about how the policy may be applied in the surrounding jurisdictions. This in part has led to a Provincial
government review of the application of this tool along, with a review of other exactions including Parkland
dedication and development charges (impact fees)
The objective of this paper is to analyze the application of density bonuses in the |City of Toronto in terms of
equity, transparency and accountability in order to provide recommendations for changes that should be made
to the current legislation and Provincial policy structure. An analysis will be undertaken of select wards in the city
of Toronto in order to compare the application and outcomes of the use of the policy.
The analysis is based on the information that has been collected regarding all the section 37 agreements (density
bonuses) that have been undertaken between 2000 and 2013. Despite the guidelines provided for the
application of this policy in the City of Toronto, there are significant variations in the application as they are
negotiated agreements with the local ward councillor playing a major role in the negotiations.
Based on the analysis of these applications in terms of equity, transparency and accountability, recommendations
will be made regarding how the legislation and perhaps the city guidelines should be changed to improve the
application of the density bonus policy. These recommendations will also be informed by practice in other
jurisdictions including the Canadian applications in other Ontario jurisdictions and in Vancouver as well as other
British Columbia jurisdictions.
References
 Alterman, Rachelle, 2012, “ land_use Regulations and Property Values: The Windfalls Capture Idea
Revisited”, in The Oxford Handbook of Urban Economics and Planning, Nancy Brooks, Kieran Donaghy,
and Gerrit-Jan Knaap (eds), Oxford University Press
 City of Toronto, 2007, “Implementation Guidelines for Section 37 of the Planning Act and Protocol for
Negotiating Section 37 Community Benefits”, City Planning Division, Policy and Research Section,
Toronto
 Moore, Aaron, 2013, “Trading Density for Benefits: Toronto and Vancouver Compared”, Institute for
Municipal Finance and Governance Papers on Municipal Finance and Governance No. 13, Munk Centre,
University of Toronto
 Smolka, Martim, and David Amborski, 2000, Value Capture for Urban Development: An Inter-American
Comparison, Lincoln Institute Working Paper, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
 City of Vancouver, 2012, “2011 Annual Report on Public Benefits Achieved Through Approvals of
Additional Density

Abstract Index #: 448
THE END OF SPRAWL?
Abstract System ID#: 1186
Individual Paper
LANDIS, John [University of Pennsylvania] jlan@design.upenn.edu
After fifty years of relentless outward suburban growth, U.S. urban development patterns may now, finally, be
taking a more manageable and sustainable turn. At least that's the view being put forth by the a series of recent
books and reports (Gallegher 2014, Ehrenhalt 203, Leinberger 2009, U.S. EPA). Thanks to a combination financial
overreach (home values in outlying U.S suburbs declined far faster during the Great Recession than they did in
closer-in neighborhood) and demographic trends (Millennials seem to prefer living and working in urban
locations much more than prior generations), the era of unconstrained suburban sprawl may finally be at an end.
is this optimism supported by the data? To find out, I will use a series of established sprawl metrics and newly
available federal and private data sources to determine whether and where sprawl is subsiding among the 200
largest U.S. metropolitan area. These efforts will include:
1. Using 1990 and 2010 tract-based Census population and housing counts to construct population and housing
unit density gradients; and to identify whether and where those gradients steepened between 1990 and 2010.
2. Using the 1992, 2001, and newly available 2011 National Land Cover Database (NLCD, a comprehensive GISbased database of land cover and  land_use measured at the 30-meter level) to identify whether and where the
rate of resource-to-urban land conversion at the urban fringe has slowed; and whether and where new urban
development is becoming less far flung, and more spatially differentiated.
3. Using the a synthesized retail subset of ArcGIS' Business Analyst database, I will determine whether and where
the form of new retail and commercial development is becoming more nodal and concentrated, and less
dispersed and highway-oriented.
These measurements of 20-year changes in metropolitan development patterns will then be statistically
compared to metropolitan population, demographic, and economic characteristics and changes; topography and
other physical characteristics; local government fragmentation and spending patterns, an most importantly,
regional and local-level changes in growth management practices. This latter analysis will hopefully let us identify
whether and where local anti-sprawl program and policy have been effective.
References
 Leigh Gallegher, 2014. The End of the Suburbs. New York: Penquin Books.
 Alan Ehrenhalt. 2013. The Great Inversion and the Future of the American City.
 Chris leinberger. 2009. The Option of Urbanism: Investing in a new American Dream.
 U.S. EPA. 2009, 2010, 2012. Residential Construction Trends in America's Metropolitan Regions

Abstract Index #: 449
THE FATES OF FORMER MAJOR LEAGUE SPORTS FACILITIES: LESSONS FOR  land_use PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 1189
Individual Paper
LONG, Judith [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] jglong@umich.edu
Since 1990, over 100 new major league sports facilities have been built across the US and Canada. Most large
cities have grappled with the planning issues that accompany these large-scale and specialized developments. In
turn, many city planners have engaged in debates over the principles of planning for sports-anchored districts,

the role of public funding in project delivery, the negotiation of community benefits agreements, and so forth
(Long 2012, Zimbalist and Long 2006, Long 2005).
Less well understood are the fates of more than 60 former facilities left in the wake of this sports construction
boom. Stories about specific facilities have occasionally emerged, though mainly as cautionary tales. The Pontiac
Silverdome, home of the NFL Detroit Lions from 1975 to 2002, made national news as it sat vacant for years and
was finally sold by the City of Pontiac for $583,000 in 2009—a bargain by any reckoning. A similar situation has
been unfolding in Houston, where debates over the future of the iconic Astrodome have fueled numerous
planning and historic preservation visions—most recently, a ULI panel recommended a concept anchored by a
large park—but implementation plans have been derailed by cost.
The purpose of this research is to examine the relationship between the fates of former major league sports
facilities and the  land_use planning decisions that have shaped their outcomes. This is an important topic
because the redevelopment of former ballparks, stadiums, and arenas offer important lessons about the
challenges and opportunities of transforming these large-scale and specialized sites.
Moreover, since current planning initiatives centered on major league sports facilities pay little attention to the
use of the site 30 years in the future (which is the average length of a major league facility lease), then it is
reasonable to anticipate difficulties transitioning these sites for more traditional  land_uses and patterns of
development when the time comes. Thus, this case serves to inform our understanding of how decisions made in
the near-term to accommodate large-scale and specialized developments may turn out to compromise
subsequent long-range redevelopment efforts.
In response to these issues, this paper begins by enumerating and classifying redevelopment outcomes for
former major league facilities, giving context to a phenomenon that is not widely understood beyond the most
high-profile cases, such as the Silverdome and the Astrodome. My data set includes captures the current use of
all facilities replaced by the round of new facility construction between 1990 and 2015, which includes over 60
venues in total. My findings indicate four major categories: 1) facilities that are in still use for sports-oriented
uses, 2) facilities that have been adapted for other uses, such as entertainment, 3) facilities that have been
demolished and their sites redeveloped, and 4) facilities or sites that remain vacant.
Building on the narrative revealed through examining the full set of redevelopment outcomes, I describe in detail
one particularly illustrative example from each category. Next, for each example I identify a set of planning
decisions—including facility type, ownership structure, location,  land_use and site planning principles—that have
shaped the present day use of these sites. Based on this evidence, I argue that host city need to pay more
attention to long-range issues of disposition and redevelopment when planning for major league sports facilities,
adapting the lifecycle approach used in real estate asset management. I conclude by offering a set of
recommendations for major league host city as they plan for post-major league phase of large-scale sports
facilities.
References
 Long, Judith G. 2012. Public-private partnerships for major league sports facilities.
 Zimbalist, A. and Long, Judith G. Facility finance and measurement. International Journal of Sports
Finance.
 Long, Judith G. 2005. Full count: the real cost of public funding for major league sports facilities.
Journal of Sports Economics.

Abstract Index #: 450
DEVELOPMENT PROCESS AND NEIGHBORHOOD TURNOVER
Abstract System ID#: 1240
Individual Paper
ROGERS, George [Texas A & M University] grogers@tamu.edu, presenting author, primary author

PARK, Yunmi [Texas A & M University] urbanmi@gmail.com
Residential development is primarily comprised of structural elements that include neighborhood design nearby
amenities and ecological attributes This paper examines the idea that the development process influences the
character of the neighborhood—specifically that the real estate development process influences neighborhood
turnover. While the structural components clearly set a framework for development, the development process
expresses the character of the neighborhood in subtle messages conveyed through the market. neighborhood in
the rapidly growing university town of College Station, Texas are analyzed in terms of neighborhood design,
nearby amenities and landscape ecology components. In addition, residential property records are used to
characterize the development process of each neighborhood in terms of the rate of development, development
gaps, and current level of completion. The multivariate analysis indicates that the process of development
influences neighborhood turnover rates which are critical in establishing stable neighborhood and sustainable
communities.
References
 King, Katherine. 2013. Jane Jacobs and ‘The need for aged buildings’: Neighbourhood historical
development pace and community social relations. Urban Studies 50 (12):2407-2424.
 Ross, Catherine E, John R Reynolds, and Karlyn J Geis. 2000. The contingent meaning of neighborhood
stability for residents' psychological well-being. American Sociological Review 65 (4):581-597.
 Schelling, Thomas C. 1971. Dynamic models of segregation. Journal of Mathematical Sociology 1 (2):143186.
 Sorensen, Janni, Jose Gamez, and Melissa Currie. 2014. Windy ridge: A neighborhood built to fail.
Applied Geography 51:8-25.
 Xie, Min, and David McDowall. 2008. The effects of residential turnover on household victimization.
Criminology 46 (3):539-575.

Abstract Index #: 451
MAKING LAND FLY: LAND QUOTA MARKETS AND LAND CONVERSION PLANNING IN CHINA
Abstract System ID#: 1241
Pre-organized Session: New Perspectives on the Regulation of Land
XIAO, Yuan [Columbia University] yx2297@columbia.edu
In this paper, I investigate China’s land quota markets, a recent land policy innovation that virtually transfers
urbanization permission from the countryside to city. To circumvent national government’s quota restrictions
on converting agricultural land to urban land, local governments have created new land quotas by demolishing
sparsely located farmhouses, and resettling peasants into high-density apartments. These quotas are then sold in
new land quota markets to real estate developers.
I find that China’s land quota markets alter the traditional calculus of location and  land_use theory: the rural
hinterlands have suddenly become valuable to urban land markets, particularly for industrial projects. In fact, the
more distant a village is, the more likely it will be involved in land quota markets. Remoteness becomes a spatial
advantage. These dramatic changes are the result of reconstructing property rights in land. The quotas traded on
the market are a right to convert  land_use from rural to urban, separate from development rights to invest in
specific properties. These institutional changes were initiated by recalibration of inter-governmental
relationships: the Central Government delegates more autonomy to local governments and the municipality
centralizes control over land from subordinating district and county governments.
The implications of the new land quota markets are profound and many. The quota markets further draw land
resources away from the rural area to urban area, and reinforces the imbalances between big and small city.
Since these institutional changes are driven by public finance at its core, the scale of our analysis needs to be
regional rather than at the scale of the city. Lastly, quota markets have mixed welfare impact on different types
of peasants. For peasants on the urban fringe, the scale of land taking is likely to increase, displacing more

peasants than without the quota markets. For peasants in the deep rural area, their housing conditions and
access to infrastructure and public services are improved. However, their transition to urban lifestyle takes place
before their transition to urban mode of production, therefore their long-term economic prospect is dismal.

Abstract Index #: 452
REGULATORY HYBRIDS: TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS (TDRS) IN MUMBAI AND NEW YORK
Abstract System ID#: 1259
Pre-organized Session: New Perspectives on the Regulation of Land
BALAKRISHNAN, Sai [Columbia University] sbalakrishnan@law.columbia.edu
Regulating density has long been a core land-use function of local governments. The traditional zoning
instrument for density regulation is the FAR (floor area ratio, which specifies the maximum built up area
permissible on a zoning lot). This paper analyzes a new form of density zoning – the transfer of development
rights (TDR) – which promises to make zoning more flexible and market-oriented. The TDR program divides city
into subdistricts, and market players have more choice in allocating and trading development rights within these
subdistricts. The earliest advocates of TDRs saw them as an innovative solution to protecting urban resources
that are of collective value to society (such as parks, affordable housing, ecologically sensitive lands), but without
disproportionately imposing the regulatory burdens of maintaining these resources on a few landowners. Since
these low-density resources are situated in locations where the market demand for high-density use is high, TDRs
allow landowners to recoup their unused development value through either using it on another eligible receiving
site or selling it on the private market. More recent critics see TDRs as a new form of land financialization, where
investors purchase air rights in anticipation of future gains. As air futures, TDRs become a financial instrument
that is abstracted from the material, physical built environment below.
This paper compares TDRs in two bullish property markets in two different parts of the world: Mumbai and New
York. It uses these two examples to compare and contrast the use of the same land-use instrument within two
strikingly different institutional contexts. It asks how this new form of density zoning is redrawing the boundaries
between public and private control over the urban built environment, and the implications of these shifts on this
most basic of local government functions, land-use planning.

Abstract Index #: 453
USING LAND POLICY TO LOWER NATURAL HAZARD RISK
Abstract System ID#: 1271
Individual Paper
SIEMBIEDA, William [California Polytechnic State Univ. San Luis Obispo] wsiembie@calpoly.edu
When a major disaster causing death and extensive property loss occurs, victims, society and government ask:
should people rebuild where they lived before? In most instances, the answer is yes, even though the costs may
be high and the disaster risk may not be significantly reduced. The recent case of Super Storm Sandy in parts of
the states of New York and New Jersey is an example of the “remain in place” at any economic or level of risk
decision. There are, however, times when the answer is “no, let’s move to another place”. The voluntary
residential red zone (RRZ) buy-out program in Christchurch, on New Zealand’s South Island is one such instance
where moving to a safer place is the preferred government choice. Christchurch was subject to a series of
earthquake for nearly two years. In this program residential properties are acquired by the national government,
the buildings removed, people moved to other locations, and the risk of future losses were vastly decreased.
From June 2011 to September 2014 some 7,349 residental properties in the City of Christchurch designated as
being in a Red Zone and subject to acquisition by the national government and 5,310 were bought and the
houses on them demolished. The main questions explored in this paper are: What information and conditions led

to the national government making this multi-billion dollar  land_use decision, and what procedural actions were
needed to implement the decision?
The Red Zone experience is driven by the existence of a government issued seismic insurance coverage for land
damage underneath a dwelling. This, linked to the extensive damage to horizontal infrastructure (water, waste
water, storm water and roadways) in the affected area led the government decision to’retreat’ from the area,
rather than repair and rebuild. This is a case of geo-technical information being combined with long term risk
exposure to drive  land_use policy.
No eminent domain procedure was used, but an equivilent process of no urban service provison led the property
owners to sell to the government under one of two schemes: Option 1 a full buyout by government of both land
and structures, an Option 2 a land sale to the national government and negotiation for house and contents
valuation with insurance companies. The role of complex insurance procedures and that of the New Zealand High
Court decisions are taken into consideration in understanding the underlying forces behind this event.
References
 Kim Karl, and Olshansky, Robert B. Theory and Practice of Building Back Better. Special Issue, Journal of
the American Planning Association, vol. 80, no. 4.
 King, A., D, Middleton, C. Brown, D. Johnston, and S. Johal (2014) Insurance: Its Role in Recovery from
the 2010–2011 Canterbury Earthquake Sequence. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1193/022813EQS058M
 Olshansky, Robert B., Lewis D. Hopkins, and Laurie A. Johnson. 2012. “Disaster and Recovery: Processes
Compressed in Time.” Natural Hazards Review 13 (3): 173–78. doi:10.1061/(ASCE)NH.15276996.0000077.
 Birkland, Thomas. 2006. Lessons of Disaster: Policy Change After Catastrophic Events. Washington D.C.:
Georgetown University Press.

Abstract Index #: 454
 land_use REGULATIONS AND HOUSING MARKETS IN THE HOUSTON-GALVESTON AREA: IS AN INDEX OF LAND
USE REGULATIONS A VALID MEASURE?
Abstract System ID#: 1278
Individual Paper
ESTEVEZ, Luis [St. Cloud State University] lestevez@stcloudstate.edu
Affordability continues to be a major challenge for housing in America. Although high housing prices and the lack
of real income growth are cited as the main factors behind the housing affordability problem, some studies
suggest that stringent  land_use regulatory environments (here after referred to as LUREs) exacerbate the problem
of affordable housing. Previous research recognizes that despite having higher average incomes, Metropolitan
Statistical area (MSAs) with more stringent regulatory environments have a greater incidence of severe housing
cost burden (Gyourko & Saiz, 2008).
Even though the problem of  land_use regulations and their effect on housing affordability is clearer in MSAs with
stringent regulatory environments, this does not mean that it is not present in other less apparent regulatory
stringent MSAs. Additionally, even if the effect is not clear in terms of affordable housing, other related problems
such as exclusion and segregation could be strongly related to the type of land and development regulations in
place (Quigley & Rosenthal 2005).
The attempt to study the overall effect of LUREs on housing markets is complex. Most of the studies attempting
to measure the effect of the stringency of LUREs on housing markets have relied on the creation of a composite
index that could capture the different dimensions explaining this effect. Nonetheless, any effort to create such an
index have been conducted in LUREs known to be stringent (e.g. California, Florida, Massachusetts) which raises
questions about the possible generalization of such results (Malpezzi 2009).

Texas is among the states whose metropolitan area have been considered as not so stringent in terms of its
LUREs (Pendall, Puentes et al. 2006;). Empirical analysis looking at the overall role of local LUREs has not been
fully addressed at the MSA level in Texas, thus, little is known about their impact on housing supply and, as a
consequence, on housing affordability.
In response to this lack of evidence of the characteristics of local  land_use regulatory environments in Texas, this
research created the first city-level index characterizing local regulatory environments for housing markets in the
Houston-Galveston Area in order to test the hypothesis that this types of indices can be a valid measure to
characterize regulatory environments for housing markets in other know not so stringent regulatory
environments.
The index created proved to be a valid and reliable measure capable of taking into account the different aspects
of the relationship between  land_use regulations and housing markets. Statistical procedures allowed the
detection of a significant relationship between the stringency of local  land_use regulatory environments and local
traits such as median family income, race distribution, poverty, and median housing values. After alternative
indices were developed for a sensitivity and uncertainty analysis, the index proved to be a statistically robust
measure against modifications on the different assumptions used for its creation. This new composite index
introduced in this paper can help policy decision-makers more effectively engage the public in the design of their
cities.
References
 Gyourko, J., A. Saiz, et al. 2008. A new measure of the local regulatory environment for housing markets:
The Wharton residential  land_use regulatory index. Urban Studies 45(3): 693-729
 Malpezzi, S. 2009. “Commentary”. In Edward Glaeser and John Quigley, Eds., Housing Markets and the
Economy: Risk, Regulation, Policy; Essays in Honor of Karl Case. Cambridge, Mass: Lincoln Institute for
Land Policy, 2009, pp. 304.
 Pendall, Rolf, Robert Puentes, & Jonathan Martin. 2006. From traditional to reformed: a review of the
 land_use regulations in the nation’s 50 largest metropolitan area. The Brookings Institute, Metropolitan
Policy Program, Washington D.C. Retrieved December 17, 2014, from
http://www.brookings.edu/research/reports/2006/08/metropolitanpolicy-pendall.
 Quigley, John M., & Larry A. Rosenthal. 2005. The effects of  land_use regulation on the price of housing:
what do we know? What can we learn? CityScape: A Journal of Policy Development and Research 8(1):
69-110.

Abstract Index #: 455
PLANNING CINCINNATI: CONNECTING  land_use POLICY TO DESIGN AND EQUITY?
Abstract System ID#: 1334
Individual Paper
ZAPATA, Marisa [Portland State University] mazapata@pdx.edu
The City of Cincinnati’s planning history is bookended by its comprehensive plans of 1925 and 2012. Written
nearly 100 years apart, they emerged in two radically different political contexts. One where planning was
celebrated. The other where planning had been terminated and only recently reconstituted. Their underlying
functions diverged. One was written to address rapid population growth. The other responding to decades of
population decline.
The plans tell two important stories about trends in  land_use planning. First, compact urban form should be the
development pattern of choice. The 2012 plan embraced a ‘good’ urbanist approach, building on some of the
same concepts and priority places for growth as the 1925 plan while modifying recommendations related to
single family homes. Design policy is clearly articulated.

The plans also share their ambivalence about social justice. On one hand each plan discusses the inequity the
African American populations living in the city experience. Yet, neither makes strong advocacy positions. Three of
the four neighborhood called out in the 1925 as experiencing serious housing problems in African American
neighborhoods, are some of the most distressed African American neighborhood identified in the 2012 plan. In
both the 1925 and 2012 plan, prioritization is placed on market rate housing, not producing quality units for the
lowest earners.
In this paper, I trace how each plan conceptualizes land-use planning, and, in turn social equity and justice. Based
on careful analysis of the plans and field research in Cincinnati during the writing of the 2012 plan, I argue the
confidence in urban design does not carry over to planning for justice. This reflects the historic uneasiness of
inserting a social justice agenda into planning, where physical and social issues are unnaturally separated. I do
not believe this, at least in the 2012 plan, reflects a design dominant way of thinking. Rather, I think it reflects the
ambivalence planners have about eradicating social inequity through  land_use policy.
References
 Hopkin LD. 2001. Urban Development: The logic of making plans. Island Press.
 Talen E. 2009. Design by the Rules: The Historical Underpinnings of Form-Based Codes. Journal of the
American Planning Association. 75(2).
 Goetz E. 2015. From Breaking Down Barriers to Breaking Up comminuty: The Expanding Spatial
Strategies of Fair Housing Advocacy. Urban Affairs Review 1078087414563179

Abstract Index #: 456
THE NATIONAL HISTORIC PRESERVATION ACT FIFTY YEARS LATER: TIME FOR A NEW LAW?
Abstract System ID#: 1335
Individual Paper
KAUFMAN, Ned [Columbia University] ned@kaufmanconservation.com
A key planning innovation of the 1960s was the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA, 1965). The Act gave us
the National Register and created the preservation system we still have. Yet fifty years on, it is outmoded: in fact
it is holding preservation back. A new national preservation law is needed.
My thesis is this: that NHPA was written for the America of 1965; that it was a good law for that America; but that
the America of 1965 no longer exists; and that a new national law is needed for the America of 2015, a law that
will reconnect historic preservation to the challenges and opportunities of today’s America.
The new law must address four area of change: racial and cultural diversity; rising economic inequality; the
decline of core city and the rapid growth of suburbs; and the overarching challenge of climate change. I address
each in turn.
In the 1960s the white population stood at 85 percent, while blacks and immigrants had reached their lowest
percentages in history. Yet today whites are below 64 percent, foreign-born Americans are at near-record levels,
and diversity of language, religion, and culture continues increasing. Cultural diversity shapes both heritage and
public attitudes to its conservation. The NHPA says nothing on the subject, and although federal program have
made some strides in addressing diversity, a fundamental change of approach is needed.
In the 1960s poverty and economic inequality were declining: Americans looked forward to greater and more
widely shared prosperity. Yet these trends reversed in the 1970s. Today a record number of Americans (over 46
million) are “officially” poor, and inequality is more pronounced than in any other advanced economy. For many
Americans economic insecurity and the prospect of downward mobility have replaced optimism. These changes
have reshaped the context for preservation. In the 1960s preservation program could be designed with
“average” Americans in mind. Yet today, as society becomes increasingly stratified into rich and poor (and as
neighborhoods are increasingly segregated along economic lines), preservationists are faced with an

uncomfortable choice between serving the needs of an increasingly elite minority or not working at all. NHPA had
nothing to say about inequality, poverty, or income segregation: today preservation needs “pro-poor” policy.
In the 1960s urban decline was already a problem. But today it has reached unimagined levels. Many American
cities have been in decline for over half a century, some losing more than half their populations; some
neighborhoods have suffered declines of over 70 percent. In the 1960s vacant and abandoned property was an
almost unheard of problem, yet today it is the number one threat to the preservation of many city and
neighborhoods. Meanwhile, suburbs have burgeoned and changed dramatically: a symptom is big-box stores,
which did not exist before 1962 yet now number in the tens of thousands. NHPA has no provisions for dealing
with vacant and abandoned properties and no policy recognizing either the attractions or the problems of
suburbs: preservation today urgently needs both.
Although the environment movement made giant strides in the 1960s, climate change was not on the agenda:
that’s because it did not yet exist as a policy concern. Indeed it was not until the 1970s that the evidence for
climate change became irrefutable. Today it may be the gravest problem facing the nation—and preservation,
and particularly mass retrofit, is a critically important part of the solution. NHPA makes no reference to climate or
to mass retrofit: preservation today urgently needs a national policy for both.
In each of these four area, the degree of change in half a century has been little short of astounding. Change has
fundamentally altered the challenges and opportunities for preservation. A point-by-point comparison of
conditions then and now, together with an analysis of how change has reshaped the conditions for preservation,
demonstrates the need for a new law and identifies the major policy area it must address.
References
 Sprinkle, John H., Jr. Crafting Preservation Criteria: The National Register of Historic Places and American
Historic Preservation (New York, 2014).
 Stipe, Robert E. (ed.); A Richer Heritage: Historic Preservation in the Twenty-First Century (Chapel Hill,
2003).
 There are several historical studies of American preservation law (including those mentioned here), but
there is no publication on the subject of this talk: the need for and potential contents of a new national
preservation law.

Abstract Index #: 457
ENABLING COMMUNITY ACTION: RESILIENCY CLIMATE CHANGE COOPERATIVE PROJECT
Abstract System ID#: 1340
Poster
COOPER, John [Texas A&M University] JCooper@arch.tamu.edu, presenting author
BERKE, Philip [Texas A&M University] pberke@arch.tamu.edu, primary author
MEYER, Michele [Lousiana State University] mmeyer@lsu.edu
PEACOCK, Walter [Texas A&M University] wpeacock@arch.tamu.edu
QUIRING, Steve [Texas A&M University] squiring@geog.tamu.edu
VAN ZANDT, Shannon [Texas A&M University] svanzandt@arch.tamu.edu
HORNEY, Jennifer [Texas A&M University] horney@sph.tamhsc.edu
MASTERSON, Jaimie [Texas A&M University] jmasterson@arch.tamu.edu
The Problem
In spite of large national efforts to reduce the  impact and costs of natural disasters, average annual federal
expenditures to fund rebuilding from catastrophic and chronic losses have been rising faster than either
population or gross national product (Gall et al. 2011). This trend will likely accelerate as the destructive potential
of these events increases due to climate change and sea-level rise. Living more sustainably in coastal area is one
of the grand challenges of the 21st century (NRC 2014). It necessitates a fundamental shift away from the
current reactive, piecemeal and disjointed approach to managing coastal hazards towards a more proactive,

integrated system approach aimed at enhancing community resilience. As defined by the National Research
Council (NRC), resilience is “the ability to prepare and plan for, absorb, recover from, and more successfully adapt
to adverse events” (NRC 2012, p1).
A working group at the Institute for Sustainable Coastal comminuty, Texas A&M University has initiated a
multiyear collaborative research and engagement venture called Resiliency Climate Change Cooperative Project.
The RCCCP is creating a fundamentally different way to identify and tackle critical disaster resiliency and climate
change challenges that threaten comminuty around the world. The project has brought together faculty and
students from urban_planning and landscape architecture, the physical and social sciences, public health and
engineering to collect new data and synthesize existing information on how coastal social and physical system
work.
Core Goals
• To expand knowledge about how the emerging triple threat (storm surge, stormwater runoff flooding,
and climate change) influences coastal community hazard vulnerability.
•

To create long-term change through co-learning between researchers and vulnerable populations
around strategic community needs, and support of community capacity to actualize their own resilience.

Methods
A demonstration project was initiated in February 2013 in two inner city neighborhood in the Sims Bayou
watershed in Houston. These neighborhood have a history of environment justice and disaster vulnerability
issues. A central tenant of data collection and analysis activities is the engagement of local people as active
contributors, rather than have hazards experts do the work for (and on) local people. Core activities include:
•

•
•

Scientific and technical research focused on modeling future hazards (storm surge, inland runoff and
climate), and identifying the physical vulnerability (number, value and age of structures) and social
vulnerability of subpopulations (poverty, race, age).
Citizen science research focused on participatory mapping, water quality testing, stormwater drainage
inspection, and rainfall collection measures.
Development of a planning support system (PSS) to support data integration and allow users to develop
customized scenarios (based on selecting climate, development and infrastructure scenarios of interest
to them).

Preliminary Results
Preliminary results derived from the modeling:
• Rainfall will likely be a few inches less in 50 years, but rainfall events and flooding will be more severe.
• area exposed to flooding from sea level rise in 2100 are projected to be two times greater then area
exposed by the current 100-year floodplain.
• Based on current population in Sims Bayou, the population exposed to flooding from sea level rise in
2100 would double compared to population living in the 100-year floodplain.
• Changes in projected future development would widen floodplains in the downstream inner city
neighborhoods.
Next steps:
• Citizen science data collection activities will be conducted during the summer 2015 to supplement and
revise modeling results.
• A planning support system will be built based on our work in Houston, but designed to be applicable for
community engagement throughout the Atlantic and Gulf coasts.
References
 Gall, M., Borden, K. A., Emrich, C. T., & Cutter, S. L. (2011). The unsustainable trend of natural hazard
losses in the United States. Sustainability, 3(11), 2157-2181.
 National Research Council. (2012). Disaster Resilience: A National Imperative. National Academies Press.



National Research Council. (2014). Reducing Coastal Risks on the East and Gulf Coasts. National
Academies Press.

Abstract Index #: 458
THE FACE OF CHANGE - THE PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE OF AN URBAN COMMUNITY
Abstract System ID#: 1364
Individual Paper
RODRIGUEZ, Anthony [Texas Southern University] rodriguezam@tsu.edu, presenting author, primary author
ESECHIE, Jovita [Texas Southern University] jesechie2002@yahoo.com
ESTWICK, Noel M. [Prairie View A & M University] noel3@gmail.com
This paper will look at Third Ward and the 288 Corridor for its past perspective and the metro rail lines for the
current and future. The development of transportation infrastructure in urban America has for the most part
facilitated significant economic development. The elite have been a major influence in shaping the growth of the
commercial sector in most comminuty on the one hand while ignoring social and economic decay in the wake of
major highway projects. Since the 1970’s and 1980’s planners have entered the arena promoting collaborative
and inclusion of those affected by public decisions and choices. The decision to build or not to build are often
made on economic lines while the principle of collaboration (Schorr, 1997), inclusion and just outcomes (Young,
2000) are non-existent or perchance.
The emphasis on expanding transportation routes facilitating connection to the Central Business District (CBD)
core has come at a significant cost to the businesses and residents, due to eminent domain actions, displaced
community nodes, and overall disenfranchisement. The disruption and taking of private property may fall into
the equity and economy conflict conundrum as described by Godschalk (2004). The EPA requires all projects
utilizing federal funds to take into consideration the environment impact, the term strategic environment
assessment provided the basis for making public choices that had  land_use  impact (Fischer & Seaton, 2002). Do
those guidelines provide an adequate frame work to ensure that the actual cost, conflicts, and long term
community destabilizes are considered and adequately mitigated?
In this paper, we will address the problem by using a mixed method approach in data collection and analysis. The
qualitative data analysis will demonstrate the area of concern before, during, and after the completion of State
Highway 288. The quantitative data collection and analysis will utilize census socio demographic information over
the same period and project an economic status if the highway never intruded. Additionally the paper will
examine the institutional sectors relationships in possible decision and potential policy actions within the frame
of the current and proposed transportation projects and the likely  impact on the Third Ward community
Rodriguez (2012).
Finally the study will incorporate the social determinants pointed out by Bullard (1983) and align those with the
principles of strategic environment assessment as an instrument of deliberative democracy in decision making
and see how economic pressures may have reigned at the detriment of some other just outcomes. The study will
demonstrate actions and opportunities for change and for further research that can foster the goals of social
equity and just outcomes.
References
 Bullard, R. D. (1987). Invisible Houston – The Black experience in boom and bust. College Station, TX:
Texas A&M University Press.
 Duggins, K. (November, 16, 2000) Third-ward rebound-Look in the barbershop and down the block.
Almeda is on its way back. Retrieved September 15, 2007 from,http://www.houstonpress.com/2000-1116/news/third-ward-rebound/
 Fischer, T. B., & Seaton, K. (2002). Strategic environment assessment: Effective planning instrument or
lost concept? Planning Practice & Research, 17, 31-44




Rodriguez, A. M. (2012) Dissertation: The role of the household in urban forestry as a measure of
sustainability: A matrix of action and change.
Schorr, E. B (1997). Common Purpose, Strengthening Families and neighborhood to Rebuild America.
New York, NY: Doubleday.

Abstract Index #: 459
EFFECTIVE PARTNERSHIPS TO FOSTER CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN COASTAL city
Abstract System ID#: 1383
Individual Paper
GRAHAM, Alexandra [University of Waterloo] a29graha@uwaterloo.ca, presenting author, primary author
MITCHELL, Carrie [University of Waterloo] a29graha@uwaterloo.ca
Coastal city are particularly vulnerable to climate change because of sea level rise, flooding, and rapid
urbanization. City planners have an opportunity to act as agents of change to build resilience within their coastal
city to respond to the changing climate. Since planners operate within a wider urban climate governance system,
our research looks at how planners can work effectively with boundary organizations, such as the International
Council for Local environment Initiatives (ICLEI) and the Adaptation to Climate Change Team (ACT), to foster
adaptation action in a coastal megacity, such as Vancouver, Canada.
Our research builds off of urban climate governance research (Anguelovski & Carmin, 2011; Burch, 2010) to focus
on how partnerships with boundary organizations influence adaptation planning and implementation within
cities. At the root of effective urban climate governance is the integration of science and policy (Tribbia & Moser,
2008). Partnerships with boundary organizations offer a governance approach that disseminates knowledge,
builds capacity, and engages more participants in the adaptation planning process (Bauer & Steurer, 2013). Our
research focuses on how to improve partnerships and increase the planner’s capacity to implement effective
adaptation options.
Our paper uses a case study approach, focusing on four influential boundary organizations in Vancouver, British
Columbia. We chose a case study approach to address an empirical gap in the literature (Harmon, Taylor, & Lane,
2014) and provide insight on how these partnerships operate in practice. Vancouver was chosen because of its
vulnerability to climate change and its recent climate change adaptation strategy. We conducted 30 semistructured interviews with urban planners and four focus groups with practitioners across four adaptation
boundary organizations.
Our results have direct application for planners and academics. The empirical case study on Vancouver helps
illustrate how to establish effective partnerships that foster adaptation action. Our research will also inform
academics how to prepare future city planners to build adaptive city with strong urban climate governance
systems.
References
 Anguelovski, I. & Carmin, J. (2011). Something borrowed, everything new: Innovation and
institutionalization in urban climate governance. Current Opinion in environment Sustainability, 3, 169175.
 Bauer, A. & Steurer, R. (2013). Multi-level governance of climate change through regional partnerships in
Canada and England. Geoforum, 51, 121-129.
 Tribbia, J., & Moser, S. C. (2008). More than information: what coastal managers need to plan for climate
change. environment Science and Policy, 11, 315-328.
 Burch, S. (2010). Transforming barriers into enablers of action on climate change: Insights from three
municipal case studies in British Columbia, Canada. Global environment Change, 20(2), 287-297.
 Harmon, B.P., Taylor, B.M., & Lane, M.B. (2014). Urban partnerships and climate adaptation: challenges
and opportunities. Current Opinion in environment Sustainability, 12, 74-79.

Track 8: Food system, Community Health, Safety
Abstract Index #: 460
THE SINGLE PERSON CHALLENGE IN AN AGING SOCIETY: PLANNING AND DESIGN IDEAS
Abstract System ID#: 93
Pre-organized Session: Re-creating comminuty for Optimal Aging
FORSYTH, Ann [Harvard University] aforsyth@gsd.harvard.edu
In the current century the world’s population will age significantly. How can neighborhood be successfully replanned and redesigned to support this different population? This paper reviews current understandings and
proposes reframing understandings of the relationships between people, place, and health in two area.
1. As they age people undergo physical and psychological changes although changes in life expectancies, life
histories, and medical treatments in recent and coming decades make the character of those changes something
of a moving target. Many of these changes are caused by and affect biology, behaviors, and social networks. But
a number are influenced by the planning-scale environments including exposures to toxics and irritants,
opportunities to connect to resources needed for health, and supports for healthy behaviors. I propose a refined
framework for understanding the character of these relationships and how they vary over the lifespan.
2. Household structure is also changing and will continue to evolve. Fewer people are marrying, many of the
others will divorce or be widowed in later life. Families are smaller and even in places where there is a tradition
of caring for elders, substantially longer life spans make this more of a burden for both careers and older people.
The 4-2-1 situation talked about in China--four grandparents, two parents, one child—reflects a situation of
concern far beyond China. By 2030 single person households will be one third to one half of households in
countries such as Japan, England, Germany, and France in part due to aging (OECD 2011; Forsyth 2014). While
there are benefits of reduced populations in terms of environment pressures, this new household landscape
poses planning challenges. The second part of the paper clarifies these challenges in terms of major planning
domains— land_use, transportation, urban design, housing, and community development.
Drawing on a survey of academic, professional, and popular reports of international experience, particularly in
those places dealing with the rise of small households, the second half of the paper explores new directions for
retrofitting and developing neighborhood to meet these challenges. These include: (a) strategies already in use,
(b) near term possibilities, and (c) more speculative options for both high and low/medium income societies. It
focuses on strategies for physical and social organization of neighborhood and districts within the domain of
urban_planning and community development. As well as more typical planning approaches (e.g. allowing a wider
variety of housing types), this may require new or adapted forms of organizations (e.g. service coops) and
supports for technologies (e.g. driverless vehicles).
References
 Forsyth, A. 1985. Singular Women: Housing for Low-Income Single Women Without Dependents.
Armidale, NSW: Social  impact Publications,
 Forsyth, A. and K. Crewe. 2011. Finding Common Ground in the Metropolis: Planned Residential Enclaves
as Connection or Exclusion? Journal of Architectural and Planning Research 28, 1: 58-75.
 Forsyth A. 2014. Global Suburbs and the Transition Century: Physical Suburbs in the Long Term. Urban
Design International 19. 4: 259-273.
 OECD 2011, The Future of Families: A Synthesis Report. http://www.oecd.org/sti/futures/49093502.pdf

Abstract Index #: 461
RURAL comminuty TO GROWNYC'S GREENMARKETS: SPATIAL ANALYSIS TO UNDERSTAND URBAN-RURAL
LINKAGES
Abstract System ID#: 117
Individual Paper
MINNER, Jennifer [Cornell University] j.minner@cornell.edu, presenting author
JABLONSKI, Becca [Cornell University] rb223@cornell.edu
Since 2009 the US Department of Agriculture has supported over 2,600 local food initiatives (USDA, 2013). These
initiatives are primarily concentrated in urban area where there is a sizable, growing market for local foods. They
are widely understood to support comminuty, economies, and farmers; however, there have been few, if any,
studies that holistically and empirically assess the  impact of farmers markets on both urban and rural
communities. With a grant from the USDA Agricultural and Food Initiative program this interdisciplinary research
project brings together qualitative, economic, and spatial analysis to investigate three promising area of
research on farmers’ markets and regional economic development: (1) strengthened rural--‐urban linkages, (2)
economic and community  impact of the shift to local foods (re--localization), and (3) measuring wealth creation
in seven area – Intellectual, Individual, Social, Financial, Political, Built, and Natural. This research investigates:
What are the economic and social  impact of urban farmers markets on the region, on urban neighborhood, and
in the rural comminuty that are linked to them?
This paper focuses on mapping and spatial analysis used to examine rural-urban linkages and metrics associated
with the seven wealth creation domains. The research is focused on understanding  impact around case study
rural comminuty and a subset of the 54 GrowNYC Greenmarkets in New York City. GrowNYC is a nonprofit that
focuses on environment stewardship through farmer's markets, educational program, community gardens,
and recycling program.
This research crosses state boundaries and rural/urban divides to holistically understand relationships between
producers and farmer's markets and the comminuty that have evolved as a result of this relationship.
References
 United States Department of Agriculture (2013) Fact sheet: Strengthening New Market Opportunities in
Local and Regional Food system.
http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdamediafb?contentid=2013/11/0219.xml&printable=true&co
ntentidonly=true
 GrowNYC (undated) Greenmarkets. http://www.grownyc.org/greenmarket. Last Accessed March 4,
2015
 Kornfield, D. (2014) Bringing Good Food in: A History of New York City's Greenmarket Program. Journal
of Urban History, 40(2), 345–356.

Abstract Index #: 462
COMPARING THE FOOD SHOPPING PATTERNS OF LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLDS IN COUNTIES WITH AND
WITHOUT FOOD POLICY COUNCILS
Abstract System ID#: 129
Pre-organized Session: Human Dimensions of Food Access
ROSENHEIM, Nathanael [Texas A&M University] n-rosenheim@tamu.edu
Government agencies distribute trillions of dollars each year to prevent the costs to society caused by the failure
to meet basic needs, which both contributes to and characterizes poverty. Unfortunately, policy makers define
poverty using outdated assumptions. The current food-income definition of poverty assumes that low-income
households have easy access to affordable healthy food; adequate food storage and prep facilities; and spend a
minimum of 16 hours a week preparing and cooking healthy meals (Food Research and Action Center 2012; Rose

2007). Operating within these assumptions, low-income families have no margin for error. In this context,
government program set up an impressive facade that does not address the true costs of poverty.
Food insecurity is one of these costs. Households with incomes below 185% of the poverty threshold are most
likely to struggle with hunger because of limited access to nutritionally adequate, safe, and acceptable foods
(Anderson 1990; Coleman-Jensen et al. 2011). Hunger adds a tremendous social burden to America; in 2007 –
before the economic recession increased food insecurity – the cost burden of hunger was calculated to be over
$90 billion a year. This figure included $67 billion dollars caused by illness and psychological dysfunction and $9
billion created by less education and lowered productivity (Brown et al. 2007). Even though these burdens affect
society at large, they are most acutely felt by the individuals and households living in poverty.
To address the costs of hunger, planners have implemented policy solutions designed to increase access to
healthy food. Between 2000 and 2014 nearly 200 Food Policy Councils were established in the United States.
Some of the policy implemented focus on altering the food retail environment in low-income neighborhood.
To compare area with and without Food Policy Councils, this paper utilizes a spatial panel econometric model for
counties in the continental United States.
The model uses longitudinal data from the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). SNAP has a direct
impact on the health, wellbeing, and the buying power of 1 in 7 Americans. The model uses publicly available
geocoded data on SNAP benefits and redemptions, retail locations, and commuting patterns. The model explicitly
examines the consequences of commuting patterns and retail markets, both local and in surrounding counties,
for SNAP redemption. The model provides a basis for comparing changes in SNAP redemption patterns before
and after food access policy are implemented.
Preliminary findings show that mobility and store type are important controls for predicting SNAP redemptions.
Results from this paper will highlight how retail market environments and commuting patterns can influence
redemption patterns of SNAP participants. The factors identified in this research that influence redemption
patterns will be suggestive of and have implications for policy that might enhance SNAP redemption. Future
research can then employ similar research strategies to determine whether or not such policy indeed had an
effect on SNAP redemption patterns.
References
 Anderson, Sue Ann. 1990. “Core indicators of nutritional state for difficult-to-sample populations.” The
Journal of nutrition 120:1559–1600.
 Brown, Larry, Donald Shepard, Timothy Martin, and John Orwat. 2007. “The Economic Cost of Domestic
Hunger: Estimated Annual Burden to the United States.” Technical Report, Sodexho Foundation.
 Coleman-Jensen, Alisha, Mark Nord, Margaret Andrews, and Steven Carlson. 2011. “Statistical
Supplement to Household Food Security in the United States in 2010, AP-057.” Technical Report, U.S.
Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service, Washington, D.C.
 Food Research and Action Center. 2012. “Replacing the Thrifty Food Plan in Order to Provide Adequate
Allotments for SNAP Beneficiaries.” Technical Report December, Food Research and Action Center.
 Rose, Donald. 2007. “Food Stamps, the Thrifty Food Plan, and meal preparation: the importance of the
time dimension for US nutrition policy.” Journal of nutrition education and behavior 39 (4): 226–32.

Abstract Index #: 463
HOW CAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT INTERVENTIONS RESPOND TO WICKED PROBLEMS? A CASE OF FOOD
INSECURITY AMONG IMMIGRANT FARM LABORERS IN COLONIAS ALONG THE NEW MEXICO-MEXICO BORDER
Abstract System ID#: 155
Individual Paper
KHOJASTEH, Maryam [University at Buffalo, SUNY] mkhojast@buffalo.edu, presenting author, primary author
RAJA, Samina [University at Buffalo, SUNY] sraja@buffalo.edu

Immigrant laborers significantly contribute to the U.S. agricultural sector. In 2010, more than 50% of the laborers
hired in the agriculture industry were foreign born (Rosson 2012). However, immigrant farm laborers are at great
risks for developing nutritional (Kowalski et al. 1999) and occupational (McCurdy et al. 2003) health-related
problems. A handful of studies quantified the level of food insecurity among immigrant farm laborers reporting
high rates of food insecurity associated with hunger, especially among undocumented immigrant farm workers
(Quandt et al. 2004). Access to healthy and affordable food is an even greater challenge for those immigrant farm
laborers who reside in informal rural settlements or colonias along the border of U.S. - Mexico. Colonias are
substandard residential area with limited access to water, sewage, services and transportation. Colonias’
residents have higher rates of diabetes, obesity and chronic disease as well as an alarming level of food insecurity
(Sharkey et al. 2011).
While these studies are crucial in shedding light on the unspoken reality of the U.S. farm laborers’ access to food,
they typically fall short in providing feasible recommendations for policy makers to tackle this issue. Lack of study
and/or action in regard to food insecurity among immigrant farm laborers can be explained by the complex
nature of the problem. This “wicked problem” created by the complex and controversial political nature of
immigration reform leaves researchers and policy makers reluctant to take a proactive approach in addressing
the food needs of the very people who provide the nation’s food supply. Thus, this research focuses on the
capacity of local government in addressing the issue of food insecurity among immigrant farm laborers by relying
on planning strategies and policy that can foster a community food system that serves and benefits this
population. Addressing issues tied to immigration laws and policy are typically conceived as federal government
responsibility, whereas this research provides a unique opportunity to explore innovative local government
interventions to tackle food insecurity among immigrant farm laborers.
This study employs a mixed-method approach to examine the ways in which local government can engage in
tackling food insecurity among immigrant farm laborers residing in colonias at the border of New Mexico –
Mexico (Dona Ana County, NM). This study aims to 1) explore challenges and barriers faced by the food system
stakeholders – local government, wholesalers/distributors/producers, and consumers- in providing/accessing
affordable and healthy foods in the most underserved informal immigrant settlements , and 2) provide planning
and public policy responses as a framework for the local government to strengthen the community food system.
The analysis of quantitative data derived from the National Workers Survey, USDA Food Environment Atlas, and
USDA Agricultural Census helps to provide an overview of the extent of the problem as well as complementing
the design of the interview questionnaire. The study also relies on qualitative data including but not limited to
interviews with key stakeholders and field observations to provide an in-depth analysis of the current challenges
and opportunities in the community food system. Utilizing the qualitative and quantitative data, the study
provides an inductive analysis of local governments’ capacity in tackling the extreme disconnections between
producers and consumers in colonias. We expect our findings, grounded in the community’s opportunities, to
provide implications for planning and public policy interventions that simultaneously increase agricultural viability
and food security among immigrant farm laborers.
References
 Kowalski, Kimberly, Carolyn J. Hoffman, and A. M. Y. McClure. 1999. "Nutritional Patterns and Needs of
Migrant Farm Workers in Northwest Michigan." Journal of the American Dietetic Association no. 99
(2):221-224.
 McCurdy, Stephen A., Steven J. Samuels, Daniel J. Carroll, James J. Beaumont, and Lynne A. Morrin.
2003. "Agricultural injury in California migrant Hispanic farm workers." American Journal of Industrial
Medicine no. 44 (3):225-235.
 Quandt, Sara A. , Thomas A. Arcury, Julie Early, Janeth Tapia, and Jessie D. Davis. 2004. "Household food
security among migrant and seasonal latino farmworkers in North Carolina." Public Health Reports no.
119 (6):568-576.
 Rosson, C. Parr. 2012. "Regional Views on the Role of Immigrant Labor on U.S. and Southern Dairies."
Journal of Agricultural and Applied Economics no. 44 (3):269-277.
 Sharkey, Joseph R., Wesley R. Dean, and Cassandra M. Johnson. 2011. "Association of household and
community characteristics with adult and child food insecurity among Mexican-origin households in
colonias along the Texas-Mexico border." International journal for equity in health no. 10 (1):19-19.

Abstract Index #: 464
ARE NEW SUPERMARKETS WORTH YOUR FOOD STAMPS? EVALUATING SHOPPING BEHAVIOR CHANGE IN
FOOD DESERTS WITH SPATIAL DATA
Abstract System ID#: 182
Pre-organized Session: Human Dimensions of Food Access
CHRISINGER, Benjamin [University of Pennsylvania] benjc@design.upenn.edu
Neighborhoods that are underserved by supermarkets, or "food deserts," often have corresponding high rates of
diet-related disease, low-income and minority populations, and have drawn attention from community
development planners and policymakers [1]. Among the most capital-intensive of interventions to improve food
access are supermarket development program, which attract new stores with a variety of financing mechanisms,
including low-interest loans, tax credits, grants, and other incentives. Recent studies have sought to measure the
health effects of new stores, partially in response earlier research and advocacy that suggested low food access
was related to poor health [2-3].
Existing health evaluations focus on downstream behavior changes, including consumption of fruits and
vegetables and obesity status. However, a causal model suggests that for new supermarkets to improve the
health of individuals (change in food choice), they must first be utilized for food shopping (change in store
choice). Low-income residents often choose supermarkets as their primary stores, even when they must travel
outside of their neighborhood to access them, though we also understand this choice of store to be complex and
multidimensional [4]. Thus, there are critical reasons for planners, policymakers, and researchers to avoid
assumptions about store adoption and instead explore how this change in shopping behavior occurs.
Recent geospatial research using data from the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP, formerly food
stamps), presents opportunities for this exploration [5]. SNAP exists as a system of approved food retailers who
can accept benefits, and program participants, who redeem benefits via electronic card payment (akin to
credit/debit card transactions). This study examines if, how, and when new supermarkets in food deserts are
adopted by low-income shoppers. Three research questions guide this inquiry:
1.
2.
3.

Do new stores capture food dollars from low-income households that were formerly spent elsewhere?
Given that food expenditures are relatively constant, what effect do new stores have on existing stores
in adjacent area?
Are project and neighborhood-level variables related to the relative rate and strength of new store
adoption?

Two main SNAP datasets are employed: 1) addresses of all approved SNAP retailers, and 2) ZIP-level amounts of
SNAP redemption; both are annual records from 2000 to the present. In the absence of proprietary retailer data,
these records offer the best possible estimate of local behavior change caused by new store development across
multiple locations. From a comprehensive review of media, reports, and other documents, and interviews with
industry experts, a database of food desert developments was assembled. Tract-level data from the American
Community Survey was used to estimate the amount of SNAP benefits potentially available in each area. To
focus the study, three states are examined: California, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey. These states are significant
in terms of number of projects (33% of all completed supermarkets), and their highly-replicated models of
financing new store development.
In a preliminary sense, several spatial trends are evident: first, many new stores yield increases in the ZIP-level
amount of SNAP dollars redeemed annually; second, the increases seen in some neighborhood are not seen in
others; and third, increases in certain neighborhood appear to affect redemption in others. Three approaches
will quantify these trends:

1.
2.
3.

Difference-in-Difference Analysis (behavior change). Determine if rise in SNAP redemption is
significantly greater in area with new stores (treatment), controlling for other neighborhood factors.
Network Analysis (impact on neighboring area). Measure the extent to which one area's change in in
SNAP redemption is explained by changes observed in neighboring area.
Regression with Spatially-Lagged Dependent Variable (correlates of success). Determine significant
neighborhood/project characteristics, given geographic interactions and clustering that exists in SNAP
redemption.

References
 Giang, T., et al. (2008). Closing the Grocery Gap in Underserved comminuty: The Creation of the
Pennsylvania Fresh Food Financing Initiative. Journal of Public Health Management Practice, 42(5), 503512.
 Elbel, B., Moran, A., Dixon, L. B., Kiszko, K., Cantor, J., Abrams, C., & Mijanovich, T. (2015). Assessment of
a government-subsidized supermarket in a high-need area on household food availability and children’s
dietary intakes. Public health nutrition, 1-10.
 Cummins, S., Flint, E., & Matthews, S. A. (2014). New neighborhood grocery store increased awareness
of food access but did not alter dietary habits or obesity. Health Affairs, 33(2), 283-291.
 Cannuscio, C. C., Hillier, A., Karpyn, A., & Glanz, K. (2014). The social dynamics of healthy food shopping
and store choice in an urban environment.Social Science & Medicine, 122, 13-20.
 Shannon, J. (2014). What does SNAP benefit usage tell us about food access in low-income
neighborhoods?. Social Science & Medicine, 107, 89-99.

Abstract Index #: 465
MOBILITY FOR THE AGING: A STUDY IN EAST LANSING, MICHIGAN
Abstract System ID#: 190
Pre-organized Session: Re-creating comminuty for Optimal Aging
KOTVAL-K, Zeenat [Michigan State University] kotvalze@msu.edu
Concerns for the aging population go beyond just health issues. They transcend to financial stability, quality of
life and mobility issues as well. An upswing in the trend of aging in place brings new meaning to mobility for this
population cohort. Relatively active lifestyles of those seeking to age in place mean the transportation
infrastructure needs to continue to evolve to meet the unique needs of this group. Not only do health providers
have a responsibility in ascertaining mobility concerns of their older patients, but city and transit agencies also
need to do their part in planning for safe and practical mobility and accessibility for their aging resident base.
This study looks at the spatial distribution of the elderly population in the city of East Lansing, Michigan and
accesses the infrastructure that encourages or hampers their mobility and accessibility. We look at the
transportation infrastructure available to those aging in place and those that are in retirement or assisted living
facilities in East Lansing, while distinguishing between the young-elderly (aged 65 years to 75 years) and oldelderly (aged over 75 years) population. The study uncovers nuances that accompany the efforts of specialized
public transportation and conventional transportation as they cater to the aging population. Planning to have
the right infrastructure in place to enable the aging population to maintain their quality of life and activities is
considered to be a basic necessity in their overall health assessment.
References
 Ravulaparthy, S., Yoon, S., and Konstandinos, G. (2013). “Linking elderly transportation mobility and
subjective well-being: A multivariate latent modeling approach”. Transportation Research Record, Issue
2382, 28-36.
 Haustein, S. (2012). “Mobility behavior of the elderly: An attitude-based segmentation approach for a
heterogeneous target group”, Transportation, 39(6), 1079-1103.
 Kim, S. (2011). “Assessing mobility in an aging society: Personal and built environment factors associated
with older people’s subjective transportation deficiency in the US”. Transportation Research Part FTraffic Psychology and Behavior, 14(5), 422-429.





Cao, X., Mokhtarian, P., and Handy, S. (2010). “Neighborhood design and the accessibility of the elderly:
An empirical analysis in northern California”. International Journal of Sustainable Transportation, 4(6),
347-371.
Alsnih, R. and Hensher, D. (2003). “The mobility and accessibility of seniors in an aging population”.
Transportation Research Part A – Policy and Practice, 37(10), 903-916.

Abstract Index #: 466
FOOD SYSTEM PLANNING: DO RURAL area DESERVE SPECIAL ATTENTION?
Abstract System ID#: 1181
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session
CLARK, Jill [The Ohio State University] clark.1099@osu.edu
RAJA, Samina [University at Buffalo, SUNY] sraja@buffalo.edu
FREEDGOOD, Julia [American Farmland Trust] jfreedgood@farmland.org
We invite attendees to a conversation about rurality in food system planning. Rural food system planning has not
received the same attention as urban food system planning. While a small but steady scholarly leadership has
focused on rural area, mainstream planning scholars and practitioners have not given rural area the attention
needed despite calls for increased consideration (Frank and Reiss, 2014; White, 2014; Daniels and Lapping, 1996).
When rural area are considered, they are often treated as “downscaled city,” “cities in waiting,” or simply a
blank canvas on which to impose particular sectoral agendas (Frank and Reiss, 2014, pg. 386).
In this roundtable, panelists will discuss experiences of working with and studying in rural comminuty on across
the United States. In particular, we will discuss parameters that create difference in rural food system, including
governance and institutional arrangements, civic engagement and community partnerships, food system
infrastructure and markets, and community capitals and capacity that impact the planning efforts and
opportunity in the food system. Join this roundtable to further develop a research agenda on rural food system
planning.
References
 Daniels, T. L. and Lapping, M.B. (1996). The two rural Americas need more, not less planning. Journal of
the American Planning Association. 62(3), 285.
 Frank, K. I., & Reiss, S. A. (2014). The Rural Planning Perspective at an Opportune Time. Journal of
Planning Literature. 29(4): 368-402.
 White, S. S. (2014). Farmers and rural Kansas comminuty: Planning for the future. The Journal of Rural
and Community Development, 9(3), 227– 242.
Abstract Index #: 467
PERCEPTIONS OF NEIGHBORHOOD WALK-FRIENDLINESS AND WALKING AMONG OLDER ADULTS IN A MIDSIZED US CITY: SUBURBAN AND MORE URBAN neighborhood COMPARED
Abstract System ID#: 287
Pre-organized Session: Re-creating comminuty for Optimal Aging
MILES, Rebecca [Florida State University] rebecca.miles@fsu.edu
If current trends continue, the population of older adults in the US will continue to grow most rapidly in suburban
locations; such area tend to have few if any destinations within walking distance of homes. Whether and in
what locations to plan at the neighborhood level for more opportunities for walking as part of daily routines
therefore are important issues as US city and counties consider their role in enabling optimal aging. Physical
activity is a critical dimension of optimal aging and its health benefits are well documented; walking is the type of
physical activity that is most common among older adults. To help guide where to locate investments, a better
understanding is needed of older adults’ walking behaviors and perceptions of walk-friendliness in suburban

compared to other neighborhood environments, and in mid-sized city in particular as these have been less
studied.
This study focuses on a mid-sized, low density city, and asks first whether older residents of Neighborhood
Naturally Occurring Retirement comminuty (NNORCs) in suburban, single-family residential neighborhood
report walking less, or getting out of the house less, than residents of more urban NNORCs, and whether they
tend to walk for different purposes. NORCs are comminuty that were not designed for older people, but rather
that evolve over time to include a relatively large concentration of older residents. Second, this study asks how
different are the behaviors suburban residents report compared to those living in single-family, medium-density
housing developments in more rural parts of the county.
And third, it asks to what extent these behaviors depend on the perceived walk-friendliness of the neighborhood,
and perceived ability to reach common destinations on foot, and to what extent they depend on the importance
residents place on being able to walk to local destinations or on having close ties with neighbors. And lastly, it
examines the extent to which age, health status, or stage in the transition away from driving make a difference.
The most consistent finding of the small number of empirical studies of the social and built environment and
walking among older adults, is that availability of commercial destinations within walking distance from home is
significantly associated with higher walking activity (Kerr, Rosenberg, and Frank 2012; Yen, Michael and Perdue
2009). However, one study of older adults in Portland, Oregon found that this was only true for survey
participants who indicated at least some walking activity (Nagel et al., 2008). Furthermore, when disaggregated
by purpose of the walking activity, another study of older women in Portland found that although urban women
walked more to reach destinations than did suburban women, the frequency of recreational walking was similar
(Patterson and Chapman 2004).
This paper is based on a household survey of 445 adults aged 65 years or older and living in a Neighborhood
NORC in Leon County, Florida, including the City of Tallahassee. Households headed by older adults were
identified using voter registration lists and linked to census blockgroups using an address-matching algorithm.
Sampling was carried out within strata, proportionate to size; strata were defined by a measure of neighborhood
built environment type created for the project (Aurand, Miles & Usher, 2014), and median household income of
the blockgroup. In-person interviews were carried out between January and August 2013. Statistical analyses
form the basis of the investigation of research questions.
analyses are ongoing, preliminary findings indicate that on a scale summarizing responses to a series of items
measuring perceived walk-friendliness of the neighborhood environment, there is no significant difference in the
scores of residents of neighborhood classified as suburban single-family residential and those of residents of
urban, mixed residential or urban commercial neighborhood. The latter two groups however perceive that they
have a significantly higher number of destinations they can walk to from home “without much trouble”
compared to suburban residents.
References
 Aurand, Andrew, Rebecca Miles, and Kareem Usher. 2014. “Local Environment of Neighborhood
Naturally Occurring Retirement comminuty (NORC) in a Mid-Sized U.S. City.” Journal of Housing for the
Elderly 28(2):133–64.
 Kerr, Jacqueline, Dori Rosenberg, and Lawrence Frank. 2012. “The Role of the Built Environment in
Healthy Aging: Community Design, Physical Activity, and Health among Older Adults.” Journal of
Planning Literature 27(1):43–60.
 Michael, Yvonne L., Mandy K. Green, and Stephanie A. Farquhar. 2006. “Neighborhood Design and
Active Aging.” Health & Place 12(4):734–40.
 Nagel, Corey L., Nichole E. Carlson, Mark Bosworth, and Yvonne L. Michael. 2008. “The Relation between
Neighborhood Built Environment and Walking Activity among Older Adults.” American Journal of
Epidemiology 168(4):461–68.



Patterson, Patricia K., and Nancy J. Chapman. 2004. “Urban Form and Older Residents’ Service Use,
Walking, Driving, Quality of Life, and Neighborhood Satisfaction.” American Journal of Health Promotion
19(1):45–52.

Abstract Index #: 468
IS URBAN AGRICULTURE GROWTH MEETING EXPECTATIONS? A CRITICAL LOOK AT TRENDS IN URBAN
AGRICULTURE POLICY, REGULATIONS, AND PRACTICES IN THE UNITED STATES.
Abstract System ID#: 297
Individual Paper
FRICANO, Russell [Minnesota State University, Mankato] russell.fricano@mnsu.edu, presenting author
DAVIS, Carla [Alabama A&M University] tcarla2davis@gmail.com, primary author
Urban agriculture is a dynamic process that can grow or decline. While urban agriculture program have gained in
popularity over the previous decade, farming within city remains vulnerable due to land tenure (Castillo,
Winkle, Krauss, Turkewitz, Silva, & Heinemann, 2013) , community resistance (Covert & Morales, 2014), and
competition with other uses for land considered “sustainable,” such as redevelopment (Lovell, 2010). The existing
literature on urban agriculture has focused primarily on case studies of successful program; these studies
promote land preservation and acquisition (Hodgson, Campbell & Bailkey, 2011), well defined regulations and
policies (Hodgson, et al., 2011; Mukherji & Morales, 2010), education and training (Bleasedale, Crouch & Harlan,
2011) and metropolitan coordination (Krones & Edelson, 2011). However, the extent urban agriculture has grown
or declined on a national scale and the major reasons behind these trends receive little attention in current
research. The degree city follow prescribed policy and practices also warrants further study. This study
explored these issues through a survey of planning directors of city within the top 300 Metropolitan Statistical
Areas of the United States. This research found that most city incorporated urban agriculture in planning
policies and regulated urban agriculture through zoning and parks and recreation regulations. Most responding
cities experienced growth in urban agriculture to a modest degree in acreage and number of projects; however,
cities reporting a decline in urban agriculture reported a more striking loss of urban farming sites. Land
conversion ranked first among impediments to urban agriculture with few city pursuing program for
preservation and acquisition of agricultural land. Urban agriculture as a public use also ranked lower in priority to
other municipal projects. Respondents also reported lack of entrepreneurial and farming expertise as another
impediment. Further, there was little coordination of municipal urban agriculture program with adjacent
jurisdictions. The findings of this study call for more urban farming training and education program, improved
coordination between local jurisdictions and non-profits, and regional approaches to secure farmland in urban
and peri-urban area.
References
 Bleasedale, T., Crouch, C. & Harlan S. (2011). Community gardening in disadvantaged neighborhood in
Phoenix, Arizona: Aligning program and perceptions. Journal of Agriculture, Food system, and
Community Development, 1(3), 99-113.
 Castillo, S., Winkle, C., Krauss, S., Turkewitz, A., Silva, C., & Heinemann, E. (2013). Regulatory and other
barriers to urban and peri-urban agriculture: A case study of urban planners and urban farmers from the
greater Chicago metropolitan area. Journal of Agriculture, Food System and Community Development,
3(3), 155-166.
 Covert, M. & Morales, A. (2014). Formalizing city farms: Conflict and Conciliation. In Mukhija, V. &
Loukaitou-Sideris (Eds.), The Informal American City. Beyond Taco Trucks and Day Labor (pp. 195-208).
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
 Hodgson, K., Campbell, M., & Bailkey, M. (2011). Urban agriculture: Growing healthy, sustainable
communities. (Planning Advisory Service Report No. 563). Chicago, IL: American Planning Association.
 Lovell, S. (2010). Multifunctional urban agriculture for sustainable  land_use planning in the United States.
Sustainability, 2, 2499-2522.

Abstract Index #: 469
EXPLORING ADAPTIVE PLANNING APPROACHES TO environment JUSTICE CONFLICTS IN THE COMPLEX
CITY: A CASE STUDY IN GHENT (BELGIUM)
Abstract System ID#: 314
Individual Paper
VERBEEK, Thomas [Ghent University] thomas.verbeek@ugent.be
Despite of their close connection in the past, today the domains of urban_planning and public health have grown
apart. Health and environment issues have become the responsibility of health and environment
departments, with specific professions and expertise in control, while planning departments remain mainly
focused on geographical or architectural approaches of space and time. This disconnection, resembling the
political structure with its specialized bureaucracies, hinders the inclusion of crosscutting issues like health in
spatial planning and policy. At best, in most Western countries the concerns about public health enter the
planning process in a final stage, through the more or less obligatory environment impact assessment process,
executed by specialized experts and coordinated by the environment department. Moreover this
environmental assessment process is based on a system of more or less generic environment norms and
regulations, with thresholds for an array of environment risks. Despite of its unquestioned achievements in
preventing serious environment conflicts, this institutionalization of environment health criteria in formal
laws and regulations seems to have difficulties to deal with the growing awareness of environment  impact and
the increasing empowerment and engagement of citizens, leading to continuing distrust and conflict between
citizens and the government.
The paper aims to move beyond this lock-in and explores ideas for a more context-dependent and adaptive
urban_planning perspective regarding environment health. The absence of a detailed policy framework to
reconnect both disciplines leads to developing a matrix of planning management approaches, that builds on
recent ideas of co-evolutionary and adaptive planning. Central to the matrix is the expansion of the current
institutional management approaches to environment health conflicts with additional approaches that capture
the self-organizing capacity and expertise of grassroots initiatives. At the same time the combination of
institutional versus actor-related approaches allows for adaptive planning solutions. Thereto a flexible attitude of
the government is needed to look beyond the strict environment regulations and rigid procedures.
To verify how these academic and theoretical insights could be implemented to solve urban environment
health conflicts, a case study research trajectory is devised in the city of Ghent (Belgium). The methods to detect
and analyze possible conflicts reflect recent approaches in environment justice research. First, a GIS analysis is
carried out to compare the distribution of environment  impact (air pollution and noise) with the distribution of
vulnerability (socio-economic characteristics) and responsibility (e.g. car ownership and modal choice) indicators,
allowing the detection of spatial inequalities. Second, these inequalities are examined thoroughly in case studies,
where more detailed information about the context is assembled, including bottom-up, subjective aspects, and
the processes behind the inequalities. Consequently in a third part the situation is evaluated, and a
redevelopment track can be devised making use of a combination of the four planning management approaches.
Based on the provisional results of the ongoing case study the paper will formulate recommendations how the
use of the matrix could practically support a more central place for health in urban_planning.
References
 Boelens, L., & de Roo, G. (2014). Planning of undefined becoming: First encounters of planners beyond
the plan. Planning Theory.
 Corburn, J. (2009). Toward the Healthy City: People, Places, and the Politics of urban_planning.
Cambridge, MA: Mit Press.
 de Roo, G. (2000). environment Conflicts in Compact city: Complexity, Decisionmaking, and Policy
Approaches. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 27(1), 151-162.
 Walker, G. (2012). environment justice: concepts, evidence and politics. London: Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 470
AGING IN PLACE: ANALYZING HOMEOWNER CHARACTERISTICS, MORTGAGE STATUS, AND PROPERTY VALUES
IN MATURE AND DEVELOPING SUBURBS
Abstract System ID#: 316
Pre-organized Session: Re-creating comminuty for Optimal Aging
ANACKER, Katrin [George Mason University] kanacker@gmu.edu
In 2012, 14 percent of Americans were seniors, i.e., age 65 and over, and by 2030, an estimated 20 percent of
Americans will be in this age group. The majority of seniors want to age in place and the majority owns a home
(Harrell, Lynott, Guzman, & Lampkin, 2014), typically in the suburbs. Some works have been published on aging in
place, focusing on people (Pfeiffer, forthcoming), while much less has been published focusing on place (Beck
Pooley, 2015). The goal of this manuscript is to analyze demographic, socioeconomic and housing characteristics
of neighborhood, in particular (a) the proportion of home owning seniors, (b) the proportion of homeowners
who moved into their housing unit before 1979, (c) the proportion of homeowners without a mortgage, and (d)
the median value of the owner-occupied housing unit, differentiating by central city, mature suburbs (i.e.,
median year housing unit built 1969 or earlier), and developing suburbs (i.e., median year housing unit built 1970
or later).
The geography of this paper is the 100 largest U.S. Metropolitan Statistical area (MSAs). The unit of observation
is the Census tract. The data set is the American Community Survey (ACS) 2009-2013. The variables of particular
interest are (a) Tenure by Age of Householder (B25007; subset: owner occupied housing unit: householder 65 to
74 years, householder 75 to 84 years, householder 85 years and over); (b) Tenure by Year Household Moved Into
Unit by Decade (B25038; subset: owners; moved in 1969 or earlier; moved in 1970 to 1979); (c) Mortgage Status
by Age of Householder (B25027; subsets: housing units without a mortgage, housing units with a mortgage;
householder 65 to 74 years; householder 75 years and over); and (d) Median Value Owner-Occupied Housing
Unit (B25077). The methods are descriptive statistics and regression analyses (dependent variable: median value
owner-occupied housing unit; independent variables: select demographic, socioeconomic, and housing
characteristics).
Preliminary results indicate that mature suburbs in select MSAs in the Northeast and in the Midwest have a high
proportion of homeowners who moved in 1969 or earlier and have a high proportion of homeowners without a
mortgage. While long-term residency is positive for community stability and while the lack of a mortgage is
positive for the amount of disposable income available, the housing stock may be in need of repairs, indicating
the need for public policy (Kochera, Straight, & Guterbock, 2005: Lipman, Lubell, & Salomon, 2012).
References
 Beck Pooley, K. (2015). “Debunking the ‘Cookie-Cutter’ Myth for Suburban Places and Suburban Poverty:
Analyzing Their Variety and Recent Trends.” Ed. Katrin B. Anacker. The New American Suburb: Poverty,
Race, and the Economic Crisis. 39-78. Farnham: Ashgate.
 Harrell, R., Lynott, J., Guzman, S., & Lampkin, C. (2014). What is Livable? Community Preferences of
Older Adults. Washington, DC: AARP Public Policy Institute.
 Kochera, A., Straight, A., & Guterbock, T. (2005). Beyond 50.05: A Report to the Nation on Livable
Communities: Creating Environments for Successful Aging. Washington, DC: AARP Public Policy Institute.
 Lipman, B., Lubell, J., & Salomon, E. (2012). Housing and Aging Population: Are We Prepared?
Washington, DC: Center for Housing Policy.
 Pfeiffer, D. (forthcoming). “Housing and Aging.” Eds. Katrin B. Anacker, Andrew T. Carswell, Sarah D.
Kirby, and Kenneth T. Tremblay, Jr. Introduction to Housing. Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press.

Abstract Index #: 471
PROMOTING environment JUSTICE AROUND NEIGHBORHOOD OIL WELLS IN SOUTH LOS ANGELES:
COMMUNITY ORGANIZING FOR A CO-PRODUCTION MODEL OF CODE ENFORCEMENT AND NUISANCE
ABATEMENT
Abstract System ID#: 346

Poster
MORRISON HAWKINS, Breanna [University of Southern California] bnmorris@usc.edu, presenting author
IBRAHIM, Nancy [Esperanza Housing Corporation] nancy@esperanzacommunityhousing.org, primary author
NAVARRO, Sandy [Esperanza Housing Corporation] sandy@esperanzacommunityhousing.org
TIO, Rosaline [University of Southern California] rtio@usc.edu
LEWIS, LaVonna [University of Southern California] llewis@usc.edu
Los Angeles was founded over an underground sea of oil, which sometimes seeps to the surface, as in the
dinosaur traps of the La Brea Tar Pits, but other times are pumped to the surface near schoolyards and residential
communities. Few people knew of the oil field hidden away in the University Park neighborhood of South Los
Angeles until production suddenly increased by 400% between 2009 and 2010. Approximately 270 nuisance
complaints have been logged since 2010 by local stakeholders who experienced foul odors, headaches, nausea,
nosebleeds and other health conditions.
The University Park neighborhood, near the University of Southern California, is a densely populated community
primarily comprised of low-income, people of color. Within less than a few hundred feet of the neighborhood oil
facility are hundreds of homes, a number of schools, including a school for children with special needs, two parks,
and a University of predominately young women. The eruption of complaints created a growing sentiment
among community residents, advocacy organizations and some elected officials that oil extraction is an
incompatible use with the surrounding neighborhood.
The recent rise in the cost of oil prompted many previously dormant or low-producing urban oil wells to
substantially and rapidly increase their oil production. As in the case of University Park, residential and
commercial neighborhood developed around oil facilities during their periods of dormancy and low production,
contributing to problems of incompatible land-uses today. The chemicals and processes used in the oil facility in
University Park have been linked to a myriad of health risks for the surrounding neighborhood.
Most planning literature discusses the benefits of designing land-use policy to avoid incompatible land-uses in the
future. However, little planning research focuses on strategies to ameliorate conflicts arising from existing or
newly erupting land-use incompatibility. Moreover, although some studies depict the role of community
organizing in promoting environment justice for comminuty of color, fewer studies have been conducted on
the role of community organizing in initiating participatory processes used to enforce land-use and other
regulatory policy that mitigate the disproportionate health burdens for under-served populations.
Co-production is a process in which comminuty work together with the public sector to more efficiently and
effectively produce public services. Invented in response to a local issue, we wish to share this concept of coproduction more broadly, because the co-production of health and safety code enforcement could lead to more
informed community stakeholders in future participatory planning endeavors. Outcomes from this study highlight
ways in which community organizing can lead to progress towards a co-production model of health and safety
code enforcement.
This study reports findings from a community-based case study conducted through a partnership between
Esperanza Housing Corporation, a nonprofit organization serving economically distressed neighborhood in South
Los Angeles, and students from the University of Southern California. This study utilizes a mixed-methods
approach that incorporates pre/post community health survey data collected before and after a recent voluntary
and temporary closure of the University Park oil site’s operations. We rely also on spatial analysis, stakeholder
interviews and participant observations. These methods were employed to (1) document the strengths and
weaknesses of the existing air quality regulatory agency’s code enforcement system; (2) identify the ways in
which Esperanza’s organizing efforts impact the agency’s code enforcement rules through a co-production
model; and (3) demonstrate changes in community health since the community’s engagement in the regulatory
process. The study also reflects on what these co-production activities contribute to the planning process, and
how this organizing has led to influences on community planning that could prevent similar incompatible  land_use
conflicts in other parts of Los Angeles in the future.

References
 Kim, Ki-Hyun, Shamin Ara Jahan, and Ehsanul Kabir. (2013). A review on human health perspective of air
pollution with respect to allergies and asthma. Environment international 59: 41-52.
 Jabareen, Y. R. (2006). Sustainable urban forms their typologies, models, and concepts. Journal of
planning education and research, 26(1), 38-52.
 Minkler, M., Vásquez, V. B., Tajik, M., & Petersen, D. (2008). Promoting environment justice through
community-based participatory research: the role of community and partnership capacity. Health
Education & Behavior, 35(1), 119-137.
 Brandsen, T., & Pestoff, V. (2006). Co-production, the third sector and the delivery of public services: An
introduction. Public management review, 8(4), 493-501.
 Anderson H, Favarato G, Atkinson R. (2011). Long-term exposure to outdoor air pollution and the
prevalence of asthma: meta-analysis of multi-community prevalence studies. Air Qual Atmos Health.

Abstract Index #: 472
NEIGHBORHOOD PARKS: HOW CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS MATTER
Abstract System ID#: 349
Individual Paper
EDWARDS, Mary [University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign] mmedward@illinois.edu
Neighborhood parks are critical to the social fabric of many neighborhood and play an important role in
encouraging physical activity for youth and adults. Although one objective of any park improvement plan is to
increase park use, few studies examine whether or not this is actually the case. This paper examines whether
physical improvements to a neighborhood park increased its use and park-based physical activity. Observational
data were collected on park use and activity at the intervention park and two control parks at two different
points in time: pre- and post-park improvement construction. On-site surveys of park users were also conducted
at the post-construction phase to better understand users’ perceptions and experiences after park improvements
were completed. The paper discusses the implications of the park improvements in terms of overall park use and
use among different population groups.
References
 Cohen, D. A., Golinelli, D., Williamson, S., Sehgal, A., Marsh, T., and McKenzie, T. L. (2009). Effects of Park
Improvements on Park Use and Physical Activity: Policy and Programming Implications. American Journal
of Preventive Medicine, 37(6), 475-480.
 Floyd, M., Spngler, JO., Maddock, JE., Gobster, PH., Suau, L. 2008. environment and Social Correlates of
Physical Activity in Neighborhood Parks: An Observational Study in Tampa and Chicago. Leisure Sciences,
30: 360-375.
 Veitch, J., Ball, K. Crawford, D., Abbott, G., Psych, GD., Salmon, J. 2012. Park Improvements and Park
Activity. American Journal of Preventative Medicine 42(6): 616-619.
 Tester, J., and Baker, R. 2009. Making the Playfields Even: Evaluating the Impact of an environment
Intervention on Park Use and Physical Activity. Preventive Medicine, 48, 316-320.
 McKenzie, T. and Cohen, D. 2006. SOPARC Description and Procedures Manual.

Index #: 473
CLIMATE VARIABILITY AND DECISION SHORTCUTS IN EMERGENCY PLANNING AND MANAGEMENT
Abstract System ID#: 360
Individual Paper
WERNSTEDT, Kris [Virginia Tech] krisw@vt.edu

All localities endure occasional extreme weather events such as floods or droughts, but some area also may
experience intermediate- to long-term term variations in weather patterns where precipitation, temperature, or
storms may deviate sharply from long-term normals. The variations may include exceptionally busy hurricane
seasons, long-term droughts, El Niño or La Niña events, or other extreme seasonal weather. Anticipation of such
seasonal anomalies holds promise for improving flood, drought, and hurricane preparation, and some local
officials have effectively used seasonal climate forecasts to improve emergency management practice. However,
prior research suggests that even when signals are clear and extreme events appear strongly correlated with
seasonal climate signals, the application of climate information to improve local disaster planning poses
difficulties.
With support from the NSF and NOAA, we have conducted a multi-year, mixed methods study using focus groups,
simulation exercises, and a survey to examine climate forecast use in emergency planning and management. We
emphasize the ways in which local emergency managers (EMs) make decisions with uncertain forecasts and
whether these decisions differ when forecasts are presented differently. Our principal hypothesis is that these
public officials apply a variety of heuristics, or decision shortcuts, in using information to decide on a course of
action for an uncertain future. While a large literature in risk and decision analysis has emerged on the influence
of these heuristics and the potentially perverse outcomes that result from their application in decision making of
private individuals, much less has appeared on the role of the heuristics in public decision making under
uncertainty, the target of our work. Drawing on a sample of the general population, we also explore whether the
difficulties that these EMs face in decision making under uncertainty differ from those of the average person on
the street.
We have previously shared findings of our focus groups and exercises with emergency managers at the ACSP
conference, but in this paper and presentation we present the results of a national-level survey of county
emergency managers engaged in flood and drought planning and emergency management. In addition to
collecting background information on respondents (e.g., gender, professional experience, educational
background, etc.), the survey questionnaire presents eight climate and flood emergency management scenarios
to investigate the role of several decision heuristics (e.g., numeracy, anchoring, and prospect theory) in
influencing the choice of actions. Each of the eight scenario has four treatments, but each of the respondents
sees only one of these treatments. As noted above, we also have imposed the same structure in a survey of the
general population. To test for differences across different treatments and with respect to EMs vs. the general
population, we employ ANOVA analysis.
In addition to contributing to understanding of decision-making processes, our project will develop general
practical mechanisms to improve risk communication and the incorporation of scientific information in flood and
drought planning, mitigation, and management. Moreover, although centered on climate variability, the work
applies to a much larger class of problems associated with decision making under uncertainty, a central element
of planning practice but one that the planning literature has virtually entirely ignored.
References
 Gigerenzer, Gerd, Ralph Hertwig, Eva van den Broek, Barbara Fasolo, and Konstantinos V. Katsikopoulos.
2005. A 30% Chance of Rain Tomorrow: How Does the Public Understand Probabilistic Weather
Forecasts? Risk Analysis 25 (3):623-629.
 Kahneman, Daniel, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky, eds. 1982. Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics
and Biases. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 May, Peter J., and Walter Williams. 1986. Disaster Policy Implementation: Managing program Under
Shared Governance. New York: Plenum Press.
 National Research Council. 1999. Making Climate Forecasts Matter. Washington, D.C.: National Research
Council.
 Tetlock, P. E. 2000. Cognitive Biases and Organizational Correctives: Do Both Disease and Cure Depend
on the Ideological Beholder? Administrative Science Quarterly. 45 (2):293-326.

Abstract Index #: 474
ASSOCIATION OF THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT WITH PHYSICAL ACTIVITY AND OBESITY AMONG RESIDENTS OF
LOW-INCOME neighborhood: A CASE OF LOW-INCOME neighborhood IN SAVANNAH, GA
Abstract System ID#: 486
Individual Paper
RUKMANA, Deden [Savannah State University] rukmanad@savannahstate.edu, presenting author, primary
author
KIM, Sujin [Savannah State University] kims@savannahstate.edu
The prevalence of obesity in the United States has reached alarming proportions for adults and children. Flegal et
al (2010) found the prevalence of obesity among men and women in 2007-2008 were 33.8% and 35.5%
respectively. Obesity is responsible for approximately 5% to 7% of total annual health care expenditures in the
United States. Obesity is also associated with poverty. The National Health Interview Survey dataset identified
that the lowest income groups contain a disproportionately higher proportion of obese persons. Hill et al (2003)
assert that individual factor, particularly genetic, clearly contributes to individual differences in weight and
height, but the rapid weight gain is a result of the changing environment. environment factors promote
overconsumption of energy and reduce total energy expenditure by reducing physical activity (Papas et al 2007).
This NIH‐funded study collects data of obesity levels and pertinent related factors behavioral/lifestyle factors,
built environment factors and socioeconomic/demographic factors from residents in six low‐income
neighborhoods in Savannah, Georgia. The surveys were conducted in two rounds to produce a two-year
longitudinal dataset: June 2012-May 2013 and June 2013-April 2014. The survey includes 65 questions covering
obesity and health‐ related topics: 1) Behavioral/lifestyle/cultural beliefs: nutrition, eating habits, physical
activity, leisure activities; 2) Perceived/actual built environment: sidewalks, bike paths, playgrounds, gyms,
medical care facilities, and grocery stores availability, and 3) Socioeconomic/demographic: age, gender, race,
household size and ages, education, income, marital status, employment status, access to health care, health
insurance, age when children were born, etc.
The data collection also include BMI and waist circumference measurements of randomly selected residents and
field observations about the neighborhood' built environment, including availability of playground or
recreational facilities, sidewalks and bike paths, and food outlets including supermarkets, grocery stores,
convenience stores, fast food establishments, full‐service restaurants and limited‐service restaurants in and
surrounding the study area.
This study finds the obesity rate of residents of low-income neighborhood is 35.8%. Obese respondents and nonobese respondents have differences in physical activities, eating habits and the use of neighborhood facilities.
The ANOVA tests show insignificant differences between obese and non-obese respondents except for (1) the
total minutes of walking during break and/or lunch time at work or school, (2) the frequency of eating pizza and
(3) the use of park, public recreation centers, gyms, or fitness facilities, trail for walking or biking, and school that
allows the public to use their facility for physical activity. Using these preliminary findings, this study will develop
a multivariate model and identify the association of the built environment with physical activity and obesity
among the residents of low-income neighborhood.
References
 Feng, J., Glass, T.A., Curriero, F.C., Stewart, W.F., and Schwartz, B.S. (2010). The built environment and
obesity: A systematic review of the epidemiologic evidence. Health & Place 16(2): 175-190
 Hill, J.O., Wyatt, H.R., Reed, G.W., and Peters, J.C. 2010. Obesity and the environment: Where do we go
from here. Science 299, pp. 853-855
 Hood, E. (2005). Dwelling disparities: How poor housing leads to poor health. environment Health
Perspectives 113, pp. A310-A317
 Papas, M.A., Alberg, A.J., Ewing, R., Helzlsouer, K.J., Gary, T.L., and Klassen, A.C. (2007). The built
environment and obesity. Epidemiology Review 29, pp. 129-143



Wakefield, J. (2004). Fighting obesity through the built environment. environment Health Perspective
112(11), pp. A616-A618

Abstract Index #: 475
THE DESIGN OF BUILT ENVIRONMENTS IN PROMOTING SCHOOL TRAVEL SAFETY
Abstract System ID#: 406
Individual Paper
YU, Chia-Yuan [University of Central Florida] hello_gerry@yahoo.com.tw
Children are recognized as a particularly vulnerable group for traffic-related fatalities and injuries (National
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 2012). In the U.S., motor-vehicle collisions were the leading cause of death
for children with age 4, 11, 12, 13, and 14 in 2010 (National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 2012). An
average of 3 children aged 14 and younger were killed, and 469 within this age range were injured in traffic
crashes each day in 2010 in the U.S. (National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 2012).
School area experience an abundant amount of vehicles traffic (e.g., trips picking up children from school) during
the morning and afternoon peak periods. For example, there were about 30 billion vehicle miles traveled and 6.6
billion vehicle trips made for taking/picking up children to/from school in 2009 in the U.S. (N. C. McDonald,
Brown, Marchetti, & Pedroso, 2011). Traffic concerns were identified as a prominent factor for parents to
determine child’s travel mode to/from school (Martin & Carlson, 2005).
This study used a comprehensive approach to examine a wide range of built environment attributes, including
road environments and neighborhood environments around schools, for their potential links with crashes
involving elementary school–aged children during school travel time. The author analyzed the risk of occurrence
of a collision involving elementary school–aged children during school travel time around 78 elementary schools
in the Austin Independent School District (AISD), TX, by using two-level (street segment–level and school–level)
binomial logistic models.
The results showed that school area with a greater percentage of population with low education levels (less than
high school) were associated with increased likelihoods of having crashes involving elementary school–aged
children during school travel time.
For road environments, highways/interstates and arterial roads had higher probabilities of school travel–related
crashes, while local roads had lower likelihoods. Roads with completed sidewalks decreased the likelihood of
crashes involving elementary school–aged children during school travel time. This study added to previous
research that two contextual variables (arterial roads and transit stop) had significant influence on school travelrelated collisions.
The results have several implications for built environment designs around schools and school site choice in
promoting school travel safety. First, planners should plan an environment with low traffic volume and low-speed
roads around the school area. Second, planners should consider strategies to limit non-residential uses along the
streets near schools and/or locate schools within or close to residential neighborhood. Last, planners should pay
more attention to roads with transit services. Based on the possible explanation that transit stops produce
multiple pedestrian activities at a time and lead to potential traffic conflicts, planners need to use traffic calming
strategies such as the provision of buffers between transit stops and vehicle roadways to promote safety.
References
 National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. (2012). Traffic Safety Facts 2010. Washington, DC.
 McDonald, N. C., Brown, A. L., Marchetti, L. M., & Pedroso, M. S. (2011). U.S. School Travel, 2009 An
Assessment of Trends. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 41(2), 146-151.



Martin, S., & Carlson, S. (2005). Barriers to children walking to or from school - United States, 2004
(Reprinted from MMWR, vol 54, pg 949-952, 2005). [Reprint]. Jama-Journal of the American Medical
Association, 294(17), 2160-2162.

Abstract Index #: 476
FOOD SECURITY AND LOCAL FOOD system FOR HEALTHY, LIVABLE AND SUSTAINABLE comminuty IN
NORTHERN ALABAMA
Abstract System ID#: 454
Individual Paper
HERBERT, Berneece [Alabama A&M University] berneece@gmail.com
Food security, a condition in which “… all people, at all times, have physical, social and economic access to
sufficient, safe and nutritious food that meets their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy
life” (FAO, 2002), is one of several conditions essential to a healthy and well-nourished population (ColemanJensen, 2013). Food insecurity exists when people do not have adequate physical, social or economic access.
Household measurement of food insecurity focuses on chronic hunger and poverty. The Alabama Food Bank
Association points out the disturbing trend in this wealthy country of the persistence of hunger and poverty and
contends that these problems are not confined to small pockets of American society.
USDA’s Economic Research Service (Coleman-Jensen, 2013) estimates that 14.5 percent (17.6 million households)
of American households were food insecure at least some time during 2012; these households’ access to
adequate food was limited by a lack of money and other resources. Coleman-Jensen (2013) also shows that the
average percent of food insecurity in Alabama grew from 12.5% between 2000 and 2002 to 17.9% between 2010
and 2012.
The Food Research Action Center (2012) uses a similar term – food hardship – where households indicated that
they did not have enough money to buy food that they or their family needed. FRAC estimated that Alabama had
the 2nd highest (23.4%) food hardship rate in the nation in 2011.
This research examines food insecurity and sources of food, along with the roles of urban agriculture and local
food system in North Alabama, specifically focusing on the Huntsville MSA, one of the fastest growing regions in
Alabama. The overall goal is to develop a geographic picture of the region and city at risk for food insecurity as
well as the food resources available across the region. By noting places with high food insecurity risk and
comparing them to places where food is available, analysis will indicate area of unmet need. In addition, the
research will garner options regarding the cost and benefits of a local food system for North Alabama, potential
public benefits of expanding local foods system focusing on public policy and program that support local
foods and the role of local food system improving food security. This information will enable the Local Food
Banks, City Planning Departments, and other partnering agencies to identify where initiatives addressing food
insecurity and hunger could have the greatest potential impact and to increase the understanding of sustainable
local food system planning. Ultimately, the goal is to develop a road map of strategies to share with government
and human services agencies, and families struggling with food insecurity or hunger.
The methodology for this study is adapted from a similar study conducted by Wauchope and Ward (2012) of the
Carsey Institute where they mapped food security and food sources in New Hampshire. Census tracts will be used
as a proxy for neighborhood and will use 2011-2013 American Community Survey data to determine locations of
food insecurity, and traditional and non-traditional food sources. In addition, the research will develop and
implement a convenience survey to capture key experts’ options on the costs and benefits of a local food system.
These experts will be members of the education, communication and membership sub-committees of the North
Alabama’s Food Policy Council Steering Committee.
References
 Coleman-Jensen, A., Nord, M., & Singh A. (September 2013). Household Food Security in the United
States in 2012. ERR-155, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.




Food Research and Action Research (FRAC). February 2012. Food Hardship in America 2011. Data for the
Nation, States, 100 MSAs, and Every Congressional District
Wachope, B., & Ward, S. K. (Spring 2012). Mapping Food Insecurity and Food Sources in New Hampshire
Cities and Towns. Carsey Institute. Retrieved from http://www.carseyinstitute.unh.edu/publications/IBWauchope-CAofNH-NH-Food-Insecurity.pdf

Abstract Index #: 477
WHEN IS FOOD INSECURE? IDENTIFYING SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL PATTERNS IN FOOD ACQUISITION AND
NUTRITION IN CHESTER, PA
Abstract System ID#: 456
Pre-organized Session: Human Dimensions of Food Access
WHITEMAN, Eliza [University of Pennsylvania] elizadw@design.upenn.edu, presenting author, primary author
HILLIER, Amy [University of Pennsylvania] ahillier@design.upenn.edu
Explaining geographic disparities in access to healthy food has been the subject of much research, yet little
attention has been paid to the temporal dimensions of food access and health. How food acquisition changes
over time is of particular interest when studying low-income populations, as government assistance or SNAP
benefits may be the primary means by which food purchases are made, and these benefits are typically allocated
only once a month. Despite the SNAP program’s goal of decreasing food insecurity, the benefits provided are
often not sufficient to cover a month’s worth of food, which results in the need for many to rely on emergency
food resources, such as food pantries, in order to make ends meet.
This study seeks to better understand the dynamic food acquisition patterns of low-income individuals by
evaluating how shoppers manage resource constraints with monthly benefit allocations and what role emergency
food networks play in food security and the nutrition of low-income shoppers. This paper focuses on three
questions: 1) What temporal and spatial patterns exist for food acquisition in a monthly cycle? 2) What role do
mobility and geographic access to food resources play in emergency food network usage? 3) How are nutrition
and food insecurity impacted over the course of the month by reliance on emergency food resources?
This paper employs a mixed methods approach combining quantitative analysis of survey data, nutritional coding
and geospatial techniques. We implemented a survey (n=719) in Chester, PA asking about where participants
shop for food, use of food pantries, SNAP participation and food insecurity. A subset of participants (n=89)
collected grocery receipts and recorded everywhere they acquired food (including food pantries) for a two week
period. All receipts (including food pantry acquisitions) were coded for nutrient content. Three-dimensional
mapping, distance calculations and regression analysis were used to assess diet and spatiotemporal relationships
of food acquisition.
Consistent with existing literature, this study found that SNAP recipients were nearly twice as likely to use food
pantries as non-SNAP recipients (p<0.01). This relationship was strengthened for those living closer to food
pantries, suggesting that proximity to emergency food sources plays an important role in utilization. Preliminary
3-D mapping indicates larger grocery expenditures early in the month with pantry usage increasing later in the
month. Analysis of nutritional coding is ongoing.
This study illuminates patterns of food acquisition among low-income populations that link geographic access,
resource constraints and emergency food networks. The temporal constraints of monthly assistance program,
and ensuing reliance on emergency food resources, have strong implications for the food security and nutritional
intake of low-income shoppers. This research offers methodological contributions to the investigation of urban
food environments and suggests new considerations for planners endeavoring to create healthy urban places and
policies.

References
 Hillier, A., Cannuscio, C. C., Karpyn, A., McLaughlin, J., Chilton, M., & Glanz, K. (2011). How Far Do LowIncome Parents Travel to Shop for Food? Empirical Evidence from Two Urban neighborhood. Urban
Geography, 32(5), 712–729.
 Kwan, M.-P. (2004). GIS Methods in Time-Geographic Research: Geocomputation and Geovisualization
of Human Activity Patterns. Geografiska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography, 86(4), 267–280.
 Widener, M. J., & Shannon, J. (2014). When are food deserts? Integrating time into research on food
accessibility. Health & Place, 30, 1–3.

Abstract Index #: 478
CULTURAL FACTORS INFLUENCING PARENTS' DECISION ON CHILDREN'S ACTIVE COMMUTING TO SCHOOL:
IMPLICATIONS FOR SAFE ROUTES TO SCHOOL program
Abstract System ID#: 460
Individual Paper
BAEK, So Ra [University at Buffalo, SUNY] sorabaek@buffalo.edu, presenting author, primary author
KANG, Bumjoon [University at Buffalo, SUNY] bumjoonk@buffalo.edu
BAEK, Solhyon [University at Buffalo, SUNY] sbaek3@buffalo.edu
KHOJASTEH, Maryam [University at Buffalo, SUNY] mkhojast@buffalo.edu
RAJA, Samina [University at Buffalo, SUNY] sraja@buffalo.edu
Background: Active commuting to school is one of the most effective ways to be physically active for children.
However, children in the US walk, bike, and use other forms of active transportation less than in the past.
Meanwhile, foreign-born population accounts for 13% of total US population and is rapidly growing in many
urban area. Previous studies reported differences in travel behaviors between foreign-born population and
native counterparts; foreign-born population is more likely to use transit, walk, bike and carpool, particularly
during their first five years in the US compared to the native (Blumenberg, 2007; McDonald, 2008). Few studies
examined foreign-born and ethnic minority children’s active commuting and their association with acculturation
(Martinez et al., 2008; Mendoza et al., 2010).
Understanding foreign-born population’s perception on and pattern of active commuting to school and factors
influencing their decision would help build comprehensive frameworks for Safe Routes to School (SRTS) program
that are culturally relevant and better achieve positive health  impact of active travel among all groups.
Purpose: This exploratory study focuses on differences in perceptions and attitudes toward neighborhood
environments influencing the decision on children’s active commuting to school between foreign-born and
native-born parents. It also examines whether attitudes toward active commuting to school vary by acculturation
level among foreign-born parents.
Methods: online-parent survey was conducted in March-June 2014 among parents whose children go to school in
Sweet Home Central School District in Town of Amherst, NY. A total of 376 parents who responded to the online
parent survey were found valid for analysis. The survey provided socio-demographics, commuting patterns of
both parents and children, and parents’ perceptions and concerns about neighborhood environments relating to
their children’s active commuting to school. For foreign-born parents, years of residence in the US and
acculturation questions from the short version of ARSMA-II (Cuellar et al., 1995) were additionally asked.
Descriptive and bivariate analysis were conducted to compare patterns, attitudes, and characteristics of the two
groups, and a logistic regression model was employed to examine the influence of acculturation level on the
foreign-born parents’ future decision on children’s active commuting to school.
Results: 44 out of 376 respondents (12%) were foreign-born parents. Very low rates of active commuting to
school (1.6% walked, 1.1% biked to school) and no significant difference in travel modes were reported between
the two groups. Differences in perceptions on the environment were found. Greater proportion of foreign-born
parents perceived that school was not encouraging enough for children to walk to school (p-value <0.01) and that

too much traffic along nearby streets (p-value=0.05) and high crime rate in the neighborhood made walking
unsafe (p-value<0.05) compared to the native-born parents. Among foreign-born parents, their assimilation to
American culture is negatively associated with their willingness to allow their children’s active commuting to
school in the near future when adjusted for child’s grade, gender, number of vehicles, and distance to school (pvalue<0.05).
Conclusion: greater concerns on traffic and crime safety and more critical view on school’s efforts to promote
active school travel among foreign-born parents might have reflected their previous experiences in their home
countries, where social and built environments are quite different from those of the US city. Follow-up in-depth
interviews with these parents would reveal why the perceptions differed between the two groups and why more
acculturated foreign-born parents were less likely to allow their child to walk or bike to school without an adult.
In SRTS program, great emphasis has been given to modifiable educational and environment factors.
Consideration for cultural shift might also be needed to reverse the declining trends of active school travel among
children.
References
 Blumenberg, E.S., K, 2007. Transportation Assimilation: Immigrants, Race and Ethnicity, and Mode
Choice, Transportation Research Board 86th Annual Meeting. Transportation Research Board,
Washington DC.
 Cuellar, I., Arnold, B., Maldonado, R., 1995. Acculturation Rating-Scale for Mexican-Americans Ii - a
Revision of the Original Arsma Scale. Hispanic J Behav Sci 17:275-304.
 Martinez, S.M., Ayala, G.X., Arredondo, E.M., Finch, B., Elder, J., 2008. Active transportation and
acculturation among Latino children in San Diego County. Prev Med 47:313-8.
 McDonald, N.C., 2008. Critical factors for active transportation to school among low-income and
minority students. Evidence from the 2001 National Household Travel Survey. American journal of
preventive medicine 34:341-4.
 Mendoza, J.A., Watson, K., Baranowski, T., Nicklas, T.A., Uscanga, D.K., Nguyen, N., Hanfling, M.J., 2010.
Ethnic Minority Children's Active Commuting to School and Association with Physical Activity and
Pedestrian Safety Behaviors. The journal of applied research on children: informing policy for children at
risk 1:1-23.

Abstract Index #: 479
FOOD INSECURITY IN FARM COUNTY: USE OF PUBLIC POLICY TO OVERCOME THE RURAL PARADOX
Abstract System ID#: 464
Individual Paper
WHITTAKER, Jennifer [University at Buffalo, SUNY] jrwhitta@buffalo.edu
It is unfortunate that, despite being a major source of food, rural area in the United States continue to suffer
from high rates of food insecurity (Garasky, Morton, and Greder 2006). This paradoxical condition in rural
settings continues to receive limited attention in the food security policy literature, which gives a short shrift to
rural food system (Fleischhacker et al. 2013). This paper fills a gap in the literature by documenting innovations
in public policy approaches, if any, that support, preserve, and enhance farming in rural settings in a way that
simultaneously promotes rural agricultural viability while making affordable healthy food accessible to rural
populations. The paper reports results from a national survey of local government and describes broad trends in
how planning and public policy tools are being used by rural local governments to strengthen food system. To
describe how these tools are used to promote food access and agricultural viability in rural settings, the paper
includes a deep case study of rural planners regarding their engagement in the food system. It also includes the
results of a rural county government in Cass County, Iowa trying to use public policy to strengthen the food
system. The paper concludes with insights for how local governments can use policy tools to strengthen rural
food system.

References
 Garasky, Steven, Lois Wright Morton, and Kimberly A. Greder. 2006. "The Effects of the Local Food
Environment and Social Support on Rural Food Insecurity." Journal of Hunger & environment Nutrition
no. 1 (1):83.
 Fleischhacker, Sheila, Donna Johnson, Emilee Quinn, Stephanie B. Jilcott Pitts, Carmen Byker, and
Joseph R. Sharkley. 2013. "Advancing Rural Food Access Policy Research Priorities: Process and Potential
of a Transdisciplinary Working Group." Journal of Agriculture, Food system, and Community
Development no. 3 (4):201-212.
 Mader, Erin, and Heidi Busse. 2011. "Hungry in the Heartland: Using Community Food system as a
Strategy to Reduce Rural Food Deserts." Journal of Hunger & environment Nutrition no. 6 (1):45-53.
 Ramadurai, Vandhanna, Barbara F. Sharf, and Joseph R. Sharkey. 2012. "Rural Food Insecurity in the
United States as an Overlooked Site of Struggle in Health Communication." Health Communication no.
27 (8):794-805.

Abstract Index #: 480
EVALUATION OF A COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT AND COLLECTIVE IMPACT FRAMEWORK FOR REDUCING
OBESITY
Abstract System ID#: 478
Individual Paper
MORALES, Alfonso [University of Wisconsin-Madison] morales1@wisc.edu, presenting author
SPAHR, Christopher [University of Wisconsin-Madison] spahr2@wisc.edu, primary author
In the past 50 years, epidemiology has revealed the importance of behavioral, social, economic, and
environmental factors as chronic disease risk factors. This information has been used to develop effective
interventions in clinical and community settings, leading to major declines in smoking and cardiovascular disease.
In contrast to this progress, obesity rates have increased, especially among children and disadvantaged
populations, due to poor nutrition and lack of physical activity. There is a compelling need for applied research to
move comminuty from “what works” to “how to make it work”, and support is needed for broad-based
programs to accelerate research to practice.
The Wisconsin Obesity Prevention Initiative (OPI) is being conducted by a multi-disciplinary team of researchers
using a community engagement and collective impact (CECI) framework to find multi-setting strategies to reduce
the rate of obesity in Wisconsin. Phase one of the OPI develops and tests the implementation of the CECI
framework and multi-setting strategies in Menominee and Marathon Counties, Wisconsin. The OPI will address
many of the current gaps in obesity prevention in both counties specifically focusing on the built environment,
food system, and early childhood settings.
Building off of phase one, this paper will provide a comparative analysis of the two pilot counties in their ability to
implement evidence based strategies for reducing obesity. Menominee County, home to the Menominee Nation,
is almost 90% American Indian and ranks last of 72 Wisconsin Counties in the County Health Rankings with a high
prevalence of overweight and obesity in both children and adults. Marathon County is primarily a rural county
and ranks 24th in the County Health Rankings. The Marathon County Health Department identified obesity as one
of the top health priorities in a 2006 Community Health Assessment and has been working on the issue ever
since. This study will provide a background on the two counties specifically focusing on obesity rates. It will then
perform a baseline analysis of multi-setting policy, program, and design components that the counties are
already implementing in the interest of reducing obesity rates. Finally, the study will provide a detailed analysis of
the program, policy, fiscal situation, and cultural characteristics within these counties that either capacitate or
inhibit them from implementing evidence based interventions to curb obesity.
While this study focuses on two counties in Wisconsin, it will be an initial step for developing external validity for
the CECI framework used by the OPI. By characterizing the environments that can be productive in combatting
obesity, and highlighting any potential barriers to this progress, this study will inform other counties in Wisconsin

and nationally about steps they will need to take to build a collective impact “backbone” that is complemented
by community engagement to support, sustain, and increase the impact of multi-setting obesity prevention
initiatives.
References
 County Health Rankings & Roadmaps [Internet]. Available from: http://www.countyhealthrankings.org/
 McAndrews C, Marcus J. Community-Based Advocacy at the Intersection of Public Health and
Transportation: The Challenges of Addressing Local Health  impact within a Regional Policy Process.
Journal of Planning Education and Research 2014;34(2):190–202
 Pastor M, Morello-Frosch R. Integrating Public Health And Community Development To Tackle
Neighborhood Distress And Promote Well-Being. Health Affairs 2014;33(11):1890–6
 Remington, P., R. Brownson, and M. Wegner, Chronic Disease Epidemiology and Control. 3rd ed.2010,
Washington DC: American Public Health Association
 The Guide to Community Preventive Services. 2013; Available from:
http://www.thecommunityguide.org/index.html

Abstract Index #: 481
ASSESSING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN BODY MASS INDEX AND BUILT ENVIRONMENT MEASURES ACROSS
MULTIPLE CONTEXTS USING BIG DATA
Abstract System ID#: 524
Individual Paper
TROY, Austin [University of Colorado Denver] austin.troy@ucdenver.edu, presenting author, primary author
BONNELL, Levi [University of Colorado Denver] levi.bonnell@ucdenver.edu
LITTENBERG, Benjamin [University of Vermont] benjamin.littenberg@uvm.edu
A number of studies have attempted to quantify the relationship between indicators of obesity, such as body
mass index (BMI), and the physical environment. However, there is still a striking lack of agreement in the
findings of the literature. To some extent this is due to the fact that relationships appear to vary significantly by
geographic and socio-economic contexts. Few researchers have been able to systematically address this variation
due to limitations in data availability. Our team has secured access to over 50 million driver’s license records from
across six states. These records include subjects’ self-reported height, weight, age, gender and address. We also
have access to a nationwide database of business locations to generate fine resolution independent variables. In
this study we address geocode several million of these records and statistically analyze how BMI relates to two
indicators of the food environment--density of fast food and convenience store outlets--and three indicators of
walkability--accessibility to retail establishments, accessibility to open space/trails, and density of employment.
We geographically assign these indicators to subjects' addresses and analyze their relationships with BMI, using
both linear regressions and spatial error regressions to account for spatial autocorrelation. We then assess the
spatial non-stationarity of these relationships to determine how they vary by urbanization, socio-economic and
geographic contexts. Preliminary results from our analysis of one of the rural states in this database indicate that
commercial density is significantly and positively associated with BMI, a result that is at odds with much of the
literature. That analysis was validated by conducting a regression of a smaller but much more detailed data set
populated with actual measured BMI values and numerous medical and socio-economic control variables and
results were found to be consistent.

Abstract Index #: 482
TIMELINESS OF DISASTER RECOVERY AID RESPONSE IN POST-HURRICANE SANDY NEW YORK CITY
Abstract System ID#: 544
Individual Paper
CHANDRASEKHAR, Divya [Texas Southern University] divya.chandrasekhar@gmail.com, presenting author,
primary author

FINN, Donovan [Stony Brook University] donovanfinn@yahoo.com
XIAO, Yu [Texas A&M University] yuxiao@tamu.edu
Institutional response of governmental and non-governmental actors is a critical dimension of successful
community recovery after disasters. In recent years, disaster recovery management as a field has seen some
significant changes. New national and federal policy are often formulated to guide recovery and reconstruction
specifically as seen in India, Indonesia, and more recently, in the U.S. after Hurricane Katrina; multi-donor
authorities are formed to specifically coordinate actions of non-governmental actors as was seen in Indonesia,
Pakistan and Haiti; and, international aid organizations are increasingly adopting minimum standards for
response activities, such as in the Sphere Handbook.
Despite these major advances, however, failures in recovery management continue to occur. Prior research has
found that well-intentioned reconstruction policy and unregulated actions of non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) have led to involuntary displacement of coastal residents (Ingram, Franco, Rumbaitis-del Rio, & Khazai,
2006). Bureaucratic procedures have been found to delay reconstruction and create barriers for adequate and
timely aid delivery, or even to public participation in recovery planning (Mukherji, 2008; Andrew, Arlikatti, Long,
& Kendra, 2012; Green & Olshansky, 2012). What is less studied however, is the ability of aid policy to address
the changing needs of recovering households in a timely matter. The failure of aid policy and program to do so
can lead to adverse outcomes for these households, particularly for low-income and minority populations. For
instance, by HUD’s own assessment (Abt Associates, 2013), a large number of renter and homeowner households
displaced by Hurricane Katrina ended up in the public housing system four years after the disaster because
federal housing assistance aid ran out too soon. That the majority of these households were low-income and
black only adds to the picture of recovery policy exacerbating social inequities.
This research study compares the evolving needs of households affected by the 2012 Hurricane Sandy in New
York City to the timeline of recovery aid provision in the City to answer the question: was aid response timely and
accurate? This study adopts a longitudinal and multi-point perspective. Data was collected through a random
sample mail-in survey of 2,000 households in disaster-affected counties of Brooklyn, Queens, and Richmond
(Staten Island) in New York City first in 2013 and again, in 2015. Data was also collected through in-depth key
informant interviews of households in three specific New York neighborhood (Red Hook in Brooklyn, The
Rockaways in Queens, and Midland Beach in Staten Island) and through key informant interviews of public
officials involved in crafting and implementing aid policy at the state and local level. Finally, data was also
obtained through a review of secondary source documents regarding recovery policy, aid and assistance at
different levels of governance. Survey data was analyzed using descriptive and inferential statistics, and interview
and document data using qualitative content analysis techniques. The results of this research study can help
explain why recovery management succeeds or fails in the long run and how it can be changed to effect better
local recovery outcomes in future disasters.
This study is funded by the National Science Foundation and is one component of a three-year longitudinal study
on household and business recovery in New York after the 2012 Hurricane Sandy.
References
 Andrew, S., Arlikatti, S., Long, L., & Kendra, J. (2012). The Effect of Housing Assistance Arrangements on
Household Recovery: An Empirical Test of Donor-assisted and Owner-driven Approaches. Journal of
Housing and the Built Environment, pp. 1-18. doi:10.1007/s10901-012-9266-9
 Green, T. F., & Olshansky, R. B. (2012). Rebuilding housing in New Orleans: the Road Home Program
after the Hurricane Katrina disaster. Housing Policy Debate, 22(1), 75-99.
 Ingram, J. C., Franco, G., Rumbaitis-del Rio, C., & Khazai, B. (2006). Post-disaster recovery dilemmas:
challenges in balancing short-term and long-term needs for vulnerability reduction. environment
Science and Policy, 9, 607-613.
 Mukherji, A. (2008). Following the money: Impact of World Bank funds on housing recovery in postearthquake urban Kutch. Presented at the 46th Annual Conference of the Association of Collegiate
Schools of Planning, July 6-11, Chicago IL.



Abt Associates. (2013). Study of Household Transition from the Disaster Housing Assistance Program
(DHAP-Katrina) Final Report. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD). Retrieved from http://www.huduser.org/Publications/pdf/HUD-495-DHAP-Katrina.pdf

Abstract Index #: 483
COMPACT DEVELOPMENT AND BMI: environment DETERMINISM OR SELF-SELECTION?
Abstract System ID#: 549
Individual Paper
HAMIDI, Shima [University of Utah] shima.hamidi@gmail.com, presenting author
EWING, Reid [University of Utah] ewing@arch.utah.edu
MEAKINS, Gail [University of Utah] g.meakins@gmail.com
Obesity has become a significant health problem as the prevalence of adult obesity and overweight in the United
States has risen significantly in the last 30 years. If current trends continue obesity and physical inactivity may
soon overtake tobacco use as the number one modifiable cause of death.
The amount of multidisciplinary research on obesity and the built environment has grown at a frenzied pace.
There are now multiple reviews of the reviews summarizing literally hundreds of articles. Many of these reviews
point out the limitations of current work with three common themes; a general reliance on cross sectional
studies, inconsistent measures of the built environment, and discrepancies in scale between the geographical
units of analysis.
The purpose of this work is to relate weight status and physical activity of a young adult population to the built
environment at the neighborhood scale while addressing the concerns presented above. The research question
asks: How do sociodemographic characteristics at the individual level and built environment characteristics at the
neighborhood level affect BMI values and obesity status as well as participation in physical activity in young
adults?
The individual-level data for this study come from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 Cohort. The
survey is managed through the Bureau of Labor Statistics and consists of a nationally representative sample of
youth born between 1980 and 1984 with initial ages in 1997 ranging from 12 to 18 years. The census tract
compactness/sprawl index is used as the measure of the built environment for an individual’s neighborhood. This
index places urban sprawl at one end of a continuous scale and compact development at the other and consists
of 8 variables representing development density,  land_use mix and street connectivity.
Our cross sectional analysis shows, once again, that residents of compact neighborhood have lower BMIs than
residents of sprawling neighborhood, after controlling for sociodemographic differences. Why might this be the
case? environment determinism posits that the environment makes residents more or less physically active,
and hence more or less heavy. Residential self-selection posits that people who want to be physical active and fit
choose to live in compact neighborhood, while those who do not care are more likely to opt for sprawling
neighborhoods. The authors of this paper have been strong proponents of environment determinism.
From our study results, we dismiss environment determinism for two reasons. First, we find no evidence that
movers from one built environment to another have weight gains or losses within the time frame of our data set.
Second, we find no evidence that stayers in one place have higher or lower BMIs, depending on the compactness
of their neighborhood. Rather we now believe that the main effect of place, which accounts for our cross
sectional results, is one of self selection.
This conclusion is based on two findings. First, we find that people of healthy weight are more likely to move to
compact neighborhood, while people who are overweight are more likely to move to sprawling neighborhood.
Second, we find an association between weight of movers and the degree of neighborhood compactness in a
longitudinal analysis.

This is not to say that characteristics of place are unimportant, as society needs to meet the latent demand for
walkable places, which are currently undersupplied. But characteristics of place appear to have limited ability to
alter the behavior of those who are not inclined to be physical active and fit.

Abstract Index #: 484
IDENTIFYING POTENTIAL PARTICIPANTS IN THE WALKING SCHOOL BUS PROGRAM
Abstract System ID#: 555
Individual Paper
KANG, Bumjoon [University at Buffalo, SUNY] bumjoonk@buffalo.edu, presenting author, primary author
RAJA, Samina [University at Buffalo, SUNY] sraja@buffalo.edu
BAEK, So Ra [University at Buffalo, SUNY] sorabaek@buffalo.edu
BAEK, Solhyon [University at Buffalo, SUNY] sbaek3@buffalo.edu
KHOJASTEH, Maryam [University at Buffalo, SUNY] mkhojast@buffalo.edu
Physically active commuting to school among K-8th grade children notably declined from 40.7% in 1969 to 12.9%
in 2001 in the U.S (McDonald, 2007). Studies identified many co-benefits in active commuting such as vehicle trip
reduction, physical activity increase, children’s social and mental development (Mackett, Lucas, Paskins, & Turbin,
2002). However, many policy evaluation studies have identified safety issues as barriers to children’s active
commuting, as parents reported safety concerns on children’s school travel that are not supervised by
responsible adults (Stewart, 2011). To address this issue, organized program, such as the Walking School Bus
(WBS, defined as an adult-escorted group of children who walk to/from school), were proposed as a solution for
children’s school travel safety (Pedestrian and Bicycle Information Center for the Partnership for a Walkable
America). A feasibility study on the WSB program reports that the biggest challenge was recruiting participants
and lead parent volunteers (Kong et al., 2009).
The current study aims to identify potential participants of the WSB program in an urban setting. We conducted
an on-line survey among parents of K-8th graders in the Sweet Home Central School District, in the greater
Buffalo area, NY, which has 4 elementary schools (average enrollments of 354) and 1 middle school (enrollments
of 776). Between March 2014 and May 2014, parents were asked to complete a self-administered 15-to-20minute-long survey asking children’s commuting behaviors, parents’ neighborhood perceptions, attitudes toward
walking, and willingness to participate in a future WSB program (my child would walk to school, if a school-friend
were to join my child on his/her way to school). We analyzed dichotomized answers to the potential WSB
participation using descriptive statistics and a logit model with predictors of demographic variables,
neighborhood perceptions, attitudes toward walking, and distance from home to school.
Parents of 389 students (response rate: 18% of total students in the district) completed the survey, and 337
provided valid answers for the WSB participation question. Out of the valid responses, 107 (32%) answered that
they would participate in the WSB program, although active commuting prevalence among their children was
2.7% (significantly lower than the national average of 13%). Of the potential WSB participants, 92% children had
no school-friends who walk or bike to school. The logit model shows that higher grade, perceived distance
between home and school being <= 2 mi, and parent’s positive attitudes toward walking were associated with
the WSB program (p <.05).
Our data shows that a third of parents were willing to participate in the WSB program when friends of their
children also join the program. This suggests social-network approach may be effective in changing children’s
active commuting behaviors individually and collectively. It is also noteworthy that there were a substantial
number of potential participants in the WSB program in the school district where school bus service transports a
majority of the students (96% of students had school bus with the average riding time < 30 min according to the
district transportation office). Further investigations will be followed with additional objective built environment
data such as the shortest route distance and walking minutes between home and school.

References
 Kong, A. S., Sussman, A. L., Negrete, S., Patterson, N., Mittleman, R., & Hough, R. (2009). Implementation
of a Walking School Bus: Lessons Learned*. Journal of School Health, 79(7), 319-325.
 Mackett, R. L., Lucas, L., Paskins, J., & Turbin, J. (2002). Health benefits of non-car travel by children.
Paper presented at the Hertfordshire County Council Centre of Excellence Conference on ‘School and
Business Travel Plans’, Hatfield, UK.
 McDonald, N. C. (2007). Active transportation to school: Trends among US schoolchildren, 1969–2001.
American journal of preventive medicine, 32(6), 509-516.
 Pedestrian and Bicycle Information Center for the Partnership for a Walkable America. Starting a
Walking School Bus. Retrieved March 4, 2015, from http://www.walkingschoolbus.org/index.html
 Stewart, O. (2011). Findings from research on active transportation to school and implications for Safe
Routes to School program. Journal of Planning Literature, 26(2), 127-150.

Abstract Index #: 485
A WEALTH CREATION APPROACH TO DEVELOPING LOCAL FOOD system
Abstract System ID#: 591
Individual Paper
RAHE, Mallory [Oregon State University] mallory.rahe@oregonstate.edu, presenting author, primary author
MORFORD, Shawn [Rural Development Initiatives] smorford@rdiinc.org
Wealth creation is a relatively new but growing system-thinking approach to economic and community
development (Pender, Marre, & Reeder, 2012). This approach increases community leaders’ capacity to achieve
their economic development goals by using a value chain to target interventions. With an emphasis on building
multiple forms of wealth, a highly collaborative process seeks to align fragmented efforts while intentionally
creating roles for low-income individuals. Building on previous efforts, Rural Development Initiatives, Oregon
State University Extension and other partners launched a funded wealth creation program in Oregon in 2014.
Four of the six regions chose to focus on building a local food system within their region. Local food system
planning efforts are spreading across the country (Low et al., 2015) and the work fits into wealth creation model
as comminuty seeks to realize multiple benefits while meeting diverse market needs.
In the wealth creation framework, comminuty are encouraged to convene businesses within the identified
value chain and develop a shared understanding of existing market demand and the region’s collective ability to
meet this demand. The approach emphasizes local ownership, investing concurrently across the forms of capitals,
and the intentional inclusion of marginalized groups in business opportunities and entrepreneurship efforts. With
these assertions of priorities, residents lead the effort of convening stakeholders, formulating shared value
propositions, and seeking to encourage new collective behavior that provides widespread benefit. Creating a set
of indicators to monitor ongoing progress across the eight forms of capital is also a part of the program.
Interventions focused on providing access to technical assistance by connecting regional teams to other
resources and by offering coaching directly to the team leaders in a way that builds on the ground capacity within
the region.
Participant surveys, interviews, and document analysis assesses the impact of interventions and contrasts the
levels of  impact across the six participating comminuty. comminuty were most likely to build new social
capital among businesses and participants. Some concepts of the program were more readily understood than
others. In this system-approach, more resources need to be spent developing community capacity to create
indicators for measuring progress and effectively engage economically marginalized people. Participants also
struggle to balance competing goals of identifying feasible business opportunities with the desire to see tangible
benefits in the immediate region. Within the framework of a local food system this means balancing exports with
import substitution and the struggle to understand the true  impact of local businesses (Schmit, Jablonski, & Kay,
2013). In Oregon, these local efforts challenged broader industry trends towards consolidation in aggregation and
processing capacities and the resulting decline in acres devoted to high value crops. This program is instructive

for other efforts to build locally led development efforts that respond to changing market conditions and
competing priorities.
References
 Low, S. A., Adalja, A., Beaulieu, E., Key, N., Martinez, S., Melton, A., … Jablonski, B.R. (2015). Trends in
U.S. Local and Regional Food system, AP068, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research
Service, 89 pp.
 Pender, J., Marré, A., & Reeder, R. Rural Wealth Creation: Concepts, Strategies and Measures. ERR-131,
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service. March 2012.
 Schmit, T.M., Jablonski, B.B.R., & Kay, D. (2013). Assessing the Economic  impact of Regional Food Hubs:
the Case of Regional Access. Cornell University.

Abstract Index #: 486
ACCESS TO HEALTHY FOOD, FAST FOOD, AND OBESITY RATES
Abstract System ID#: 605
Individual Paper
JUNG, Yoonhee [Temple University] shiro0309@gmail.com
There has been a growing body of research focusing on built environment’s influence on dietary behavior change
based on the awareness of the impact of human diet and nutrition on health outcomes. A significant body of
literature has documented inadequacies in food environments, especially in minority and low-income
neighborhoods. The metaphor of “food deserts,” used to describe neighborhood with limited food retail, has
captured public and academic attention in recent years (Cummins and Macintyre 2002). Yet the metaphor has
been used rather loosely, in some instances referring to area marked by an absence of supermarkets (Short,
Guthman, and Raskin 2007), in others to area characterized by limited food retail outlets where people can buy
healthy foods (Wrigley et al. 2002). Several studies, for example, report fewer supermarkets in minority
neighborhoods (Raja, Ma, and Yadav 2008; Morland, Diez Roux, and Wing 2006). At the same time, the growth of
the fast food industry has been an important factor for increased food consumption. In the last 2 decades in 20th
Century, the percentage of calories attributable to fast-food consumption has increased from 3% to 12% of total
calories consumed in the United States. (Lindgren et al 1999) Fast food is notably high in fat content, and studies
have found associations between fast food intake and increased body mass index (BMI) and weight gain. (French
et all 2000)
Access to healthy food and fast food can be an important determinant of a healthy diet. This paper examines
associations between access to healthy food or fast food and obesity. Also, other sets of hypothesis that people
belonging to different socioeconomic groups, such as people of color, people of low-socioeconomic status, have
access to different neighborhood food destinations will be tested to see the relationship between access to
healthy food, fast food, race/ethnicity, and income.
The OLS (Ordinary Least-Square) regression analysis will be conducted to assess how access to grocery
stores/supermarkets, convenience stores, and fast food restaurants, and SES explain obesity rates of residents in
the U.S. The bivariate result and a couple of multivariate regression results will be provided explaining the
possible associations between access to healthy food, fast food, race/ethnicity, and income.
Given the previous findings that there are  impact of food environments on public health, disparities in the food
environments can be a critical issue degrading social justice among neighborhood. Illustrating the possible
associations between access to healthy food, fast food, race/ethnicity, and income will be beneficial for the
applications for urban planners, public health practitioners, and policy makers to provide more equitable food
access to the public.

References
 Cummins, Steven, and Sally Macintyre. 2002. A systematic study of an urban foodscape: The price and
availability of food in greater Glasgow. Urban Studies 39 (11): 2115-30.
 Short, Anne, Julie Guthman, and Samuel Raskin. 2007. Food deserts, oases, or mirages? Journal of
Planning Education and Research 26 (3): 352-64.
 Wrigley, Neil, Daniel Warm, Barrie Margetts, and Amanda Whelan. 2002. Assessing the impact of
improved retail access on diet in a “food desert”: A preliminary report. Urban Studies 39 (11): 2061-82
 Raja, S., C. Ma, and P. Yadav. 2008. Beyond food deserts: Measuring and mapping disparities in the
neighborhood food environment. Journal of Planning Education and Research 27 (4): 469-82.
 Morland, K., A. V. Diez Roux, and S. Wing. 2006. Supermarkets, other food stores, and obesity: The
atherosclerosis risk in comminuty study. American Journal of Preventive Medicine 30 (4): 333-39.

Abstract Index #: 487
CULTURING ESTABLISHED FOOD system IN A 'FOOD DESERT'
Abstract System ID#: 678
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session
BRINKLEY, Catherine [University of Pennsylvania] brinkley.kat@gmail.com
HORST, Megan [University of Washington] horstm@uw.edu
CHRISINGER, Benjamin [University of Pennsylvania] benjc@design.upenn.edu
RAJ, Subhashni [University at Buffalo, SUNY] subhashn@buffalo.edu
This round-table critiques the term 'food desert' to evaluate various planning responses. The United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) has defined a food desert as a census tract with a substantial share of lowincome residents who lack access to a large grocery store or healthy, affordable food retail outlet. Yet, 'food
deserts' often have their own well-adapted system of ride-shares to grocery outlets, bodegas, and truck
vendors. Perhaps the terminology of 'food desert' is apt- but the response inappropriate - or a case of both? This
round-table will shift the conversation of 'food desert' classification and intervention to recognizing food system
in place and how interventions might harm or augment these practices. The round-table discussion will form the
basis of a commentary for publication.
The starting point for this conversation is the critique of the term and of various responses to 'food deserts.' The
term 'desert' often implies a lack of life, though biologists (and food scholars) are apt to point out that this biome
is full of thriving ecosystems if you know how to look for them. The phrase 'food desert' itself is critiqued for its
portrayal of a bleak urban environment- often ignoring its vibrancy (McClintock, 2008; Shannon, 2014). How food
deserts are measured is also criticized. The emphasis on measuring proximity to grocery stores both ignores
other sources of food in neighborhood and people’s resourcefulness, and validates a policy approach that
emphasizes supply-oriented issues rather than political ones of anti-poverty, affordability, healthy options and
need (Battersby, 2012; Guthman, 2011). Bedore (2010) argues that work on food deserts "bounds health
problems within low-income comminuty.” The result is to place the problem and the blame squarely in poor
neighborhoods, rather than in the policy and actors which shape urban food system and accessibility
(Shannon, 2014).
The round-table will briefly share stories about what low-income comminuty around the world and through
history are doing and have done to cope with the perceived lack of fresh, healthy food. Solutions range from selfpurveying through gardens to curbside vending. The round-table will then tie these practices to planning tools
and brainstorm how current food planning policy weakens or strengthens these fresh food access points in lowincome neighborhood. For example, how does planning impact street vendors? How has street vending changed
with the introduction of a supermarket or a wholesale produce terminal? The round-table seeks to chart a
community development research and policy vision for supporting and strengthening already existing networks
of fresh, healthy food through urban gardening, fresh food financing, curbside vending and policy advocacy. Our
discussion will address the merits and drawbacks of various approaches and interventions, highlighting issues of
justice and equity attached to the spatial disparities created in places with low accessibility to healthy food.

References
 Raja, S., Ma, C., & Yadav, P. (2008). Beyond food deserts measuring and mapping racial disparities in
neighborhood food environments. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 27(4), 469-482.
 Battersby, J. (2012). Beyond the food desert: finding ways to speak about urban food security in South
Africa. Geografiska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography, 94(2), 141-159.
 Bedore, M. (2010). Just urban food system: A new direction for food access and urban social justice.
Geography Compass, 4(9), 1418-1432.
 Guthman, J. (2011). Weighing in: obesity, food justice, and the limits of capitalism (Vol. 32). Univ of
California Press.
 McClintock, N. (2008). From industrial garden to food desert: Unearthing the root structure of urban
agriculture in Oakland, California.

Abstract Index #: 488
MORE THAN THE SUM OF THEIR PARTS: AN EXPLORATION OF THE CONNECTIVE AND FACILITATIVE FUNCTIONS
OF FOOD POLICY COUNCILS
Abstract System ID#: 683
Individual Paper
DAY FARNSWORTH, Lindsey [University of Wisconsin-Madison] ldfarnsworth@wisc.edu
Decentralization and misalignment of food policy and programming at the state and local levels have resulted in
confusion and contradictory food system incentives and activities. Such misalignments call for well-designed
approaches to participatory and multi-stakeholder food system planning processes that planners can develop
and lead. By convening diverse stakeholders to address concerns pertaining to a host of food-related issues, food
policy councils can draw on their members’ wide-ranging knowledge and experience to help improve regulatory
alignment and problem-solving across the different agencies and sectors that shape our food system.
This paper highlights findings from exploratory research conducted in conjunction with the University of
Wisconsin-Madison USDA AFRI Community and Regional Food system project. It draws on the literature as well
as key informant interviews with food policy council members to uncover what motivates individuals and
organizations to participate in food policy councils, how their goals are addressed (or not) through participation
in food policy council activities, and how food councils can foster innovative collaboration among members to
produce system-level impact. In particular, this paper illuminates the contributions of food policy councils to
community and regional food system planning efforts by highlighting specific connective and facilitative
functions that food policy councils can provide to their constituents. The paper concludes with a discussion of the
implications of these findings for food policy council structure, composition and process. This paper marks an
important departure from much of the food policy council literature by critically examining dimensions of process
rather than focusing solely on council composition or outputs.
References
 Wekerle, GR. 2004. “Food Justice Movements - Policy, Planning, and Networks.” Journal of Planning
Education and Research 23 (4): 378–86. doi:10.1177/0739456X04264886.
 Pothukuchi Kami. and Jerome L. Kaufman.1998. “Placing the food system on the urban agenda: The role
of municipal institutions in food system planning.” Agriculture and Human Value 16 (2): 213
 Barling David, Tim Lang, and Martin Caraher. 2002. “Joined-up food policy? The trials of governance,
public policy and the food system.” Social Policy & Administration, 36(6), pp.556-574.
 Muller Mark, Angie Tagtow, Susan L. Roberts, and Erin MacDougall. 2009. “Aligning Food system
Policies to Advance Public Health.” Journal of Hunger & environment Nutrition 4 (3-4): 225-240.
 Connelly Sean, Sean Markey, and Mark Roseland. 2011. “Bridging sustainability and the social economy:
Achieving community transformation through local food initiatives.” Critical Social Policy 31 (2) (May):
308-324.

Abstract Index #: 489
LOCATION OF POTENTIAL EMERGENCY SHELTERS: A CASE STUDY OF TEHRAN CITY
Abstract System ID#: 787
Individual Paper
POOYAN, Zhila [International Institute of Earthquake Engineering and Seismology] zhsecret@gmail.com
Considering population growth and thereupon increasing of buildings and structures in city and especially
megacities, preparedness toward confronting potential emergency situations created by natural hazards or other
events is necessary in current urban_planning. Natural hazards such as earthquakes disrupt urban system that
interrupt emergency response and operations. Proper emergency response in city requires assessment of
potential affected population and planning for rescue, relief and emergency shelters. Given such matter, in this
paper earthquake vulnerability assessment in region one of Tehran Municipality and the location of potential
emergency shelters in study region are studied to develop guidelines on emergency preparedness in megacities.
Obviously such guidelines could be helpful confronting human-made hazards and could affect urban resiliency
too.
Tehran the capital of Iran has had significant growth in recent decades. Considering the seismicity of Tehran City
and the probable damages and consequences, supplying emergency shelter in regions of this city due to the
interactions and complexities of urban system is a very difficult task in post event. In this paper proposing the
location of emergency shelters in region one of Tehran Municipality considering seismicity and estimation of
structural and human damages using international standards is the main purpose.
The method of paper includes overview of Tehran city and case study region comprising physical, social,
administrative and spatial features and the development trend during recent decades. Then Building damages
and human casualties are estimated based on data from previous earthquakes in Iran such as Bam (2003) and
Dahooye-Zarand (2004). The building damages are estimated at three extensive, moderate and slight damage
levels. Roads network, population density and open spaces in case study region are considered in vulnerability
assessment to achieve a more precise picture of vulnerability situation. Given the vulnerability results and based
on land-use plan of study region, open spaces and public buildings such as educational or sports centers and
offices are specified. The potential spaces will be prioritized based on international standards and also
considering characteristics as area of building, accessibility, infrastructural facilities and possibility of secondary
hazards. Based on this prioritization, suitable places for emergency shelters are selected in a way to cover whole
region. Finally guidelines toward vulnerability reduction and strengthening capacities will be issued. The
guidelines are useful for similar situations in other city and countries. The results are helpful for planners and
managers at local and regional level and even planners at national level can apply the results in considerations on
improving safety and sustainability in city.
References
 American Planning Association. (1998). “Planning for Post-Disaster Recovery and Reconstruction”.
 Coburn A.W. and Spence R. (2002). “Earthquake Protection”. John Wiley & Sons Inc.
 American Planning Association. (2006). “Planning and Urban Design Standards”. John Wiley & Sons Inc.
 Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA). (2000). “The study on seismic microzoning of the greater
Tehran area in the Islamic Republic of Iran”. Tehran Disaster Management Organization, Internal Report,
SSF JR 00-186).

Abstract Index #: 490
CORNUCOPIA ON THE PLAINS: THE SPATIAL AVAILABILITY OF FRESH VEGETABLES AND FRUIT IN OKLAHOMA
Abstract System ID#: 789
Individual Paper
LOWERY, Bryce [University of Oklahoma] bryce.c.lowery@ou.edu

Food insecurity exists when individuals are unable to consistently access enough safe and nutritious food to
maintain a healthy and active life. Unfortunately, evidence continues to suggest that certain comminuty are
often without access to components of a healthy diet. I build upon previous research to understand if particular
types of comminuty are at increased risk for food insecurity due to the spatial availability of fresh vegetables
and fruit (FVF).
Among the most sensitive populations are women, children, low-income comminuty, rural residents and
communities of color. Children are at particular risk when deprived of nutrition (Cook, et al 2004) and women
who experience food insecurity are at increased risk of obesity, particularly among non-white populations
(Adams, Grummer-Strawn and Chavez 2003). In addition, low-income, non-white, and rural residents face a
greater possibility of experiencing food insecurity than do residents of other comminuty (Dean and Sharkey
2011a).
Oklahoma provides a particularly poignant setting for efforts to combat obesity through nutritional environment
interventions in rural settings. According to the United Health Foudnation, the state ranks 46th and 49th in
consumption of fresh vegetables and fruits, respectively, and 44th in rates of obesity when compared to the rest
of the United States. Additionally, Oklahoma is home to 391,949 individuals who identify as American Indian or
Alaskan Native, the second largest population of any state. The prevalence of obesity among individuals of
American Indian or Alaskan Native descent is higher than among white residents and tribal members experience
higher mortality than whites, in part because of diabetes and social determinants resulting from circumstantial
and environment deficiencies (Espey et al. 2014) such as the lack of FVF and other nutritious food.
To understand the relationship between community characteristics and the availability of fresh vegetables and
fruit, we assembled a spatial database of the addresses of approximately 1,600 stores that likely sell food across
the state of Oklahoma. This list includes large-scale chain grocery stores (WalMart, Target, etc.), small-scale
markets, corner stores, specialty markets (meat, cheese, etc.) as well as convenience stores and markets
attached to fueling stations. We conducted an assessment of the availability of fresh vegetables and fruit at a
sample of the stores across the state.
Using a modified Nutrition Environment Measures Survey for Stores (www.med.upenn.edu/nems/index.shtml)
we inventoried the availability, price, and quality of five of the most frequently purchased vegetables and fruit
according to the United States Department of Agriculture: tomatoes, potatoes, iceberg lettuce, bananas and
apples. Total area of shelf space dedicated to the provision of all fresh vegetables and fruit as well as location of
these items within the store were documented.
Geographic Information system and data from the 2010 Census and 2010 American Community Survey
estimates were employed to understand the availability of fresh vegetables and fruit in a diverse set of
communities chosen to contrast by race/ethnicity and the presence of populations who at particular risk when
experiencing food insecurity (children, the elderly, low-income populations).
Data for this work is still being collected but we anticipate that results may be consistent with previous studies
that demonstrated spatial inequality in the availability of healthy food across different types of comminuty.
Planners and public health officials continue to grapple with the disparities that exist in the nutritional landscape.
Notably, there is not a singular public policy that would alleviate hunger; food insecurity is largely contextual
(Bitto 2003). Through continued efforts, planners can better identify the spatial, social and ecological processes
that influence food availability in local comminuty as a means of crafting  land_use policy that enhances the local
nutritional environment.
References
 Adams, E.J., L. Grummer-Strawn, and G. Chavev. 2003. “Food Insecurity Is Associated with Increased Risk
of Obesity in California Women.” Journal of Nutrition 133: 1070–1074.
 Bitto, E.A., L.W. Morton, M.J. Oakland, and M. Sand. 2003. “Grocery Store Access Patterns in Rural Food
Deserts.” Journal for the Study of Food and Society. 6(2): 35-48.







Cook, J.T., D.A. Frank, C. Berkowitz, M.M. Black, P.H. Casey, D.B. Cutts, A.F. Meyers, N. Zaldivar, A.
Skalicky, S. Levenson, T. Heeren, and M. Nord. 2004. “Food insecurity is associated with adverse health
outcomes among human infants and toddlers.” Journal of Nutrition 134(6): 1432-1438.
Dean, W.R., and J.R. Sharkey. 2011b. “Rural and Urban Differences in the Associations between
Characteristics of the Community Food Environment and Fruit and Vegetable Intake.” Journal of
Nutrition Education and Behavior 43(6): 426-433
Espey, D.K., M.A. Jim, N. Cobb, M. Bartholomew, T. Becker, D. Haverkamp, and M. Plescia. 2014.
“Leading Causes of Death and All-Cause Mortality in American Indians and Alaska Natives.” American
Journal of Public Health 104(S3): S303-S311.

Abstract Index #: 491
FROM RESEARCH TO PRACTICE: USING EVIDENCE BASED INTERVENTIONS AND COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT TO
ADDRESS OBESITY IN WISCONSIN
Abstract System ID#: 793
Individual Paper
MORALES, Alfonso [University of Wisconsin-Madison] morales1@wisc.edu, presenting author, primary author
SPAHR, Christopher [University of Wisconsin-Madison] spahr2@wisc.edu
In the past 50 years, epidemiology has revealed the importance of behavioral, social, economic, and
environmental factors as chronic disease risk factors. This information has been used to develop effective
interventions in clinical and community settings, leading to major declines in smoking and cardiovascular disease.
Such interventions have been complex and vast, spanning multiple organizational environments, different
regulatory environments, distinct jurisdictions, as well as complex social/demographic/economic contexts.
Finally, there have been distinct academic assumptions to understand and reconcile to advance projects and
establish evidentiary standards for success.
The Wisconsin Obesity Prevention Initiative (OPI) is a multi-disciplinary team of researchers using a community
engagement and collective impact (CECI) framework to find multi-setting strategies to reduce the rate of obesity
in Wisconsin. Phase one of the OPI has integrated the team, engaged the comminuty, begun to develop
participatory processes for both the team and the comminuty and for relationships between the team and
communities.
This paper will describe this participatory process, from an early stage of scoping and proposing the project prior
to funding, to the pilot testing stage (July 2013, funding in July 2014 and pilot testing in April-September 2015).
This paper will describe the project, the academic team (14 MD and PhD faculty and their graduate students) and
will discuss the various frameworks for project planning and implementation and how these fared in the face of
this large and complex project.
References
 Pastor M, Morello-Frosch R. Integrating Public Health And Community Development To Tackle
Neighborhood Distress And Promote Well-Being. Health Affairs 2014;33(11):1890–6
 Remington, P., R. Brownson, and M. Wegner, Chronic Disease Epidemiology and Control. 3rd ed.2010,
Washington DC: American Public Health Association
 The Guide to Community Preventive Services. 2013; Available from:
 http://www.thecommunityguide.org/index.html

Abstract Index #: 492
BUILT ENVIRONMENT FEATURES ASSOCIATED WITH PHYSICAL ACTIVITY IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Abstract System ID#: 816
Individual Paper

DAY, Kristen [New York University] kday@nyu.edu
The World Health Organization has identified a growing obesity epidemic in developing countries, concentrated
in middle class populations and urban area (World Health Organization, 2000). Problems include sprawling,
auto-centered development; a shift away from active transportation (bicycling and walking); and an increase in
calorie-dense, Western-style diets (c.f., Day et al., 2013). Research in developed countries has identified
numerous built environment characteristics that are associated with physical activity; these features include
mixed  land_use, higher density, parks and playgrounds, and distance to nonresidential destinations (c.f.; Active
Living Research, 2010; Owen et al., 2004; Saelens & Handy, 2008). Less is known about associations between the
built environment and physical activity in developing countries, where the built environment and cultural context
differ. This paper reviews the research on the association of built environment features with physical activity in
developing countries. The paper follows the model in Saelens and Handy’s (2008) review on built environment
correlates of walking, which examined research from developed countries. The present study includes 208
studies of walking and physical activity from developed countries. Studies were identified through a search on
the Web of Science for articles using these key words: physical activity, walk, bicycle, bicycling, travel,
transportation, exercise, recreation, mode share AND environment, park, sidewalk, trail, mixed use, urban,
suburban, urban design, walkability, walkable, bike-friendly OR active living, active design, walkability. Studies
were also identified by searching the Active Living Research website and by reviewing the reference lists of
several published literature reviews and of all studies included in this analysis. All studies reported empirical
research, were conducted in one or more developing countries (as defined by the World Bank), were published in
a peer reviewed journal, were written in English, and examined the association of built environment features
(objective and/or perceived) with physical activity.
Research in this area is still in the early stages. Many studies used composite measures of the built environment
that did not isolate specific built environment features. A number of studies (12) included measures of the
perceived environment only. Most studies used self-report measures of physical activity. Of the total number of
studies conducted in developing countries, the highest number (43) were from China. A majority of studies were
conducted by researchers in public health and related fields, with some differences by country. Findings
summarize associations between built environment features and physical activity. Of special note are differences
between findings in developing countries and findings in the published research on developed countries. In this
review, findings demonstrate a consistent association of urban (versus rural) environments with lower rates of
physical activity. The association of density with physical activity is less clear than in research in developed
countries, most likely because of uniformly high levels of density in urban area for many developing countries,
and because of the lack of distinction in many studies between physical activity for recreation versus for
transportation. Conclusions suggest recommendations for future research in developing countries, with an
emphasis on research tied to policy and design decision making.
References
 Active Living Research (2010). Parks, playgrounds, and active living. Research synthesis. At:
http://activelivingresearch.org/sites/default/files/Synthesis_Mowen_Feb2010_0.pdf
 Day, K. Alfonzo, M., Chen, Y., Zuo, Z. & Lee, K.K. (2013). Overweight, obesity, and inactivity and urban
design in rapidly growing Chinese city, Health and Place, 21, 29–38.
 Owen N., Humpel N., Leslie E., et al. (2004). Understanding environment influences on walking; Review
and research agenda, American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 27(1): 67–76, July 2004.
 Saelens, B. E. & Handy, S. L. (2008). Built environment correlates of walking: A review, Medicine &
Science in Sports and Exercise, 40(75), S550–S566. doi:10.1249/MSS.0b013e31817c67a4
 World Health Organization (2000). Obesity: Preventing and managing the global epidemic. Report of a
WHO Consultation. WHO Technical Report Series No. 894. Geneva: World Health Organisation.

Abstract Index #: 493
SEEKING THE GROUND TRUTH IN environment JUSTICE: A PARTICIPATORY GIS APPROACH
Abstract System ID#: 829
Individual Paper

NAMIN, Sima [University of Texas at Arlington] sima.mehdizadegannamin@mavs.uta.edu
The use of geospatial analysis techniques in the study of environment Justice (EJ) and health has increased
tremendously in recent years. On the other hand, there has been increased emphasis on demonstrating and
incorporating indigenous environment knowledges in different area of planning, particularly environment
planning (Robbins, 2003), emphasizing the epistemological issues in GIS research that are best embedded in
questions such as whose data and whose analysis? (e.g. Chambers, 2006).
Building on the previous research on participatory GIS and environment advocacy, this paper focuses on how
Participatory GIS (PGIS) helps integrate local knowledge and experiences with expert/ traditional GIS data to
examine the environment justice status of comminuty. This research is currently pending for IRB approval and
is part of my dissertation which is focused on south Dallas neighborhood. The actual field work and interviews
are expected start by mid-March.
The main activities during PGIS are: (1) mental mapping of environment vulnerabilities and health issues, (2)
mapping the community as ecological spaces and analyzing land-use patterns, and (3) mapping the socio
economic data (and health data if possible) to identify area exposed to possible risks. Additionally the qualitative
data from interviews and focus groups will be stored in GIS. The maps will be added as another layer or, if
appropriate, added to the original layer. However, using the local knowledge is not possible in all area. For
example, with air pollution the community is able to provide information based on traffic and smell or fog, but
they can’t provide information on ozone level. In mapping the ecological spaces or environment vulnerabilities,
obtaining local knowledge provides an understanding of different realities. For example an area might be
considered a vacant land, a walking space or playground, or a brownfield. In other words, the results of PGIS
activities are largely dependent on participants’ knowledges, experiences, and impressions. Incorporating
different layers of local and expert knowledge results in what planning calls “ground truth” (Pickles, 1995).
Before the focus group I will make my GIS analysis results (standard analysis including environment features,
socioeconomic and health factors) available to participants and the community via the Internet. Hard copies of
the results will also be distributed to the participants and during neighborhood meetings. During the focus group,
the community discusses the maps, a participatory map will be created, and the main factors for the analysis will
be selected. This map will also be stored in GIS. The results will be available to all participants for further
comments or feedbacks.
References
 Chambers. (2006). Participatory mapping and geographic information system: whose map? who is
empowered and who disempowered? who gains and who loses? The Electronic Journal on Information
System in Developing Countries, 25(2), 1-11.
 Pickles, J. (1995). Representation in an electronic age: Geography, GIS, and democracy. In Ground Truth:
The Social Implications of Geographic Information system. New York: The Guilford Press, (pp. 1-30)
 Robbins, P. (2003). Beyond Ground Truth: GIS and the environment Knowledge of Herders,
Professional Foresters, and Other Traditional comminuty. Human Ecology, 31(2), 233-253.

Abstract Index #: 494
CREATING A HEALTHY COMMUNITY FOR AGING; IS PERFECT THE ENEMY OF GOOD?
Abstract System ID#: 839
Pre-organized Session: Re-creating comminuty for Optimal Aging
ROSENBLOOM, Sandra [University of Texas at Austin] SRosenbloom@utexas.edu
Over 75% of older Americans are aging-in-place in suburban or even rural comminuty where services are not
easily accessibility and there are few mobility alternatives to the car. But few older people move as they age;
those that do are more likely to move out than into the core of urban area. It is crucial to meet the problem

where it is--in auto-oriented suburbs--and create and support transportation options that allow older Americans
to become and remain healthy so they can continue to contribute to society as part-time workers, grandparents,
mentors, and volunteers. The most common travel mode of older people is overwhelming the car; we must
support ways to allow older people to drive safely or get rides when they cannot drive, while taming the car’s
destructive power. The second most common travel mode for older people is walking—even where they cannot
walk to shop or conduct personal business, as in Active Adult Retirement comminuty. Making the suburbs more
walkable, even if not more dense or having mixed  land_uses, is a crucial step in creating healthy comminuty.
Encouraging the neighborhood delivery of services and goods, as in monthly health clinics or weekly produce
markets, is a useful complement to other approaches. Providing age-appropriate public transportation is also an
option—but not the most important one, no matter how much we’d like to think it is—because it will never be
sustainable to provide transit in low density suburbs. In the future those who become 65 may live in dense,
mixed use comminuty, but in the next two decades we will have 50 million plus older people, most living in low
density places—we cannot abandon them because there is no perfect solution. The paper describes interventions
that have addressed these issue or may have the ability to do so.
References
 Rosenbloom et al (2014) Understanding Older Drivers; An Examination of Medical Conditions,
Medication Use, and Travel Behavior. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute
 Figueroa, Nielsen, and Siren, 2014. Comparing urban form correlations of the travel patterns of older
and younger drivers. transportation Policy. 35(1): 10-20.
 Choi, Lohman, & Mesuk, 2014. Trajectories of cognitive decline by driving mobility; Evidence from the
Health and Retirement Study. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. 29(5): 447-453
 Boshmann & Bardy (2013). Travel behaviors, sustainable mobility, and transit-oriented developments; a
travel counts analysis of older adults in Denver, CO metropolitan area. Journal of transportation Geography.
33(1): 1 -11
 Staplin and Freund, 2013. Policy prescriptions to preserve mobility for seniors-A dose of realism.
Accident Analysis and Prevention. 61(3): 212-221

Abstract Index #: 495
SHADE, HEALTH AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT: HOW BEHAVIORAL FACTORS CAN INFORM NEW SHADE
POLICIES
Abstract System ID#: 897
Individual Paper
TABATABAIE, Sara [University of Colorado Boulder] sara.tabatabaie@colorado.edu, presenting author, primary
author
LITT, Jill [University of Colorado at Boulder] jill.litt@colorado.edu
MULLER, Brian [University of Colorado Boulder] brian.h.muller@colorado.edu
The layout of the built environment plays an important role in creating shade and protecting urban residents
against overexposure to sun radiations (Parisi & Turnbull, 2014). As a result of global warming concerns, many
cities and other jurisdictions have developed shade-related policy and program as part of climate adaptation
plans. The effectiveness of these policy however depends on behavioral factors, physical characteristics of
neighborhoods and socio-economic factors (Buller et al., 2011). In this research, I examine the factors that affect
whether and how shade is used by people engaged in urban outdoor activities. The results of this research can
inform urban planners and public health professionals about built environment interventions that would advance
sun-protection.
We applied a mixed method approach. First, we selected a sample of neighborhood across Denver based on
morphological characteristics and SES. We analyze urban landscape design rules relevant to these neighborhood
for sun safety considerations. Next, through shade auditing and direct observation techniques we developed an
inventory of the existing shade and identified users behavior in relation to different types of shade created by
natural and built features (Whyte, 1980). We further explored why users have different preferences for shade by

interviewing a sample of neighborhood residents. We applied both qualitative and quantitative methods to
interpret these data and draw conclusions.
Our preliminary results suggest that shade desirability for urban residents is a function of the type and quality of
shade, the aesthetic characteristics of the surrounding environment and the ambient temperature. Users’ socioeconomic status as well as their knowledge about or prior experience with skin cancer are main determinants of
their shade-seeking behavior while engaging in outdoor activities. Landscape design rules are found to contain
little reference to sun safety, and there is considerable opportunity for consideration of behavioral factors in
further rule development.
References
 Buller, D. B., Cokkinides, V., Hall, H. I., Hartman, A. M., Saraiya, M., Miller, E., Glanz, K. (2011). Prevalence
of sunburn, sun protection, and indoor tanning behaviors among Americans: review from national
surveys and case studies of 3 states. Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology, 65(5 Suppl 1),
S114–23.
 Parisi, A. V, & Turnbull, D. J. (2014). Shade provision for UV minimization: a review. Photochemistry and
Photobiology, 90(3), 479–90. doi:10.1111/php.12237
 Whyte, W. H. (2005). The Social Life of Small Urban Spaces. Santa Monica, CA: Direct Cinema Ltd.

Abstract Index #: 496
COMMUNITY FOOD SECURITY AND CONVENTIONAL FOOD SYSTEM
Abstract System ID#: 953
Individual Paper
MENG, Ting [University of Pennsylvania] tmeng@design.upenn.edu
Food planning has been an active component in the framework of planning theory and practices for more than a
decade. Community food security has attracted growing interests from multiple stakeholders such as policymakers, scholars, and planners. This article argues that conventional food system could be reshaped to improve
community food security.
In previous studies, food planners addressed how to build the community food system and have turned the road
map into reality by encouraging, guiding and supporting a large variety of community food actions. This new
emerging community and regional food system has been playing a substantial role in providing healthful,
nutritious, affordable foods for community’s needs and especially for those low-income households. However,
due to various reasons, it still plays a very limited role (i.e., relatively small coverage and short seasonal operating
time). In contrast, although conventional food system has shortcomings in the perspectives of sustainable
development and regional food security due to market failure, it still dominates food supply and marketing
system. If we could fix the market failure of conventional food system by making private sectors adding social
benefits and cost in their decision-making consideration, then community food security could be enhanced via
marketing power. Therefore, reshaping the conventional food system to achieve the goal of community food
security and local development would be a very valuable question to ask.
This study examines the research question through two avenues. First, based on the food supply chain (food
producing, processing, marketing, consumption, and food waste) and major stakeholders in each knot, a
comprehensive framework is built to examine conventional food system, focusing on current profit driven
mechanism and potential approaches to promote community food security by providing incentives. For example,
the location and food choices of food retailers are driven by their profits, thus they seek to sell food items with
the lowest cost and highest sale price at the most profitable locations. We could provide proper subsidy to our
local food producers to increase their competitive, encourage consumer’s demand on local foods, and provide
food retailers tax benefit if they could consider providing fresh foods to low-income comminuty. Second, we
use a case study of Philadelphia, an old urban city with a large number of low-income households, to
demonstrate how to combine solutions from the concept framework to the real life situation. For example, local

urban food planers could use incentives to increase health food access in low-income community by encouraging
Trader Joe’s (a very popular grocery food retailer in Philadelphia) to open fresh food bars or counters in the
seven-eleven (i.e., convenient stores located quite broadly in Philadelphia).
This research on reshaping conventional food system to achieve community food security would provide a unique
perspective to food planning education and practice. It would add more tools to food planner’s toolkit to
enhance community and regional food security in a more broad and effective way. This study would provide
valuable insights on how to collaborate conventional food system, community food system, and public food
system together to purse community food security and sustainable development.
References
 Pothukuchi, Kameshwari, and Jerome L. Kaufman. "The food system: A stranger to the planning field."
Journal of the American planning association66.2 (2000): 113-124.
 American Planning Association. "Policy guide on community and regional food planning." American
Planning Association (2007).
 Campbell, Marcia Caton. "Building a Common Table The Role for Planning in Community Food system."
Journal of Planning Education and Research 23.4 (2004): 341-355.

Abstract Index #: 497
ROLE OF THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT AND NEIGHBORHOOD SAFETY IN FALL INCIDENTS AMONG OLDER ADULTS
Abstract System ID#: 956
Individual Paper
LEE, sungmin [Texas A&M University] saint83@tamu.edu, presenting author, primary author
RODIEK, Susan [Texas A&M University] srodiek@arch.tamu.edu
Background: Falls are known to have a strong and negative association with active living and well-being among
the aging population (Ageing & Unit, 2008). Every year, a third of people age 65 years or older in the United
States experience falls, which are the leading cause of both nonfatal and fatal injuries for older adults (Stevens &
Sogolow, 2005). Fall-based injury may lead to a decrease in physical activity, quality of life and social interaction.
In addition, fear of falling resulting from previous falls may even prevent older people from leaving their home.
Injuries from falls can also affect their individual health and mobility limitations (Rubenstein, 2006). Although
personal-level risk indicators of falls have been well documented, relatively few studies have focused on the
urban spatial characteristics of falls, as related to crime, traffic-safety, walkability, transit-accessibility, and the
built environment at the community level.
Objective: The aims of this paper are to (1) investigate the geographical hot spots of fall incidents at the
community level, (2) identify detailed risk factors of falls in terms of the built environment, socio-demographics,
walkability, and other safety problems at the neighborhood levels.
Methods: This study examined locations of fall incidents (2011-12) by the Emergency Medical Service (EMS) and
San Antonio Fire Department, Texas. We focused on two levels of falls in this study, total falls (26,645 incidents)
and intersection-based outdoor falls (964 incidents). The spatial unit of analysis was the census tract for the
neighborhood-level analysis. For understanding the hot spots of fall incidents among older adults, we measured
fall rates, based on total fall incidents per over 65 years and over population at the census tract level. To analyze
the environment risk factors, walkability, and other neighborhood safety conditions, we used GIS data, Walk
Score™, Transit Score™, and crime and crash incidents data. GIS was used for capturing built environment and
infrastructure/facilities (i.e.,  land_use mix, street connectivity, destinations, traffic, tree canopy, and presence of
sidewalks), and socio-demographic environment (i.e., population density, insurance rates, income, race, and age).
Walk Score™ provides a score ranging from 0 to 100 calculated based on the density and proximity of
destinations. Transit Score™ locates the nearest public transportation stop on the route, the frequency of the
route, and type of route. We will use negative binomial models to analyze the effects of neighborhood
environments and safety on fall incidences using.

Results and conclusions: High traffic volume, high speed, and lack of sidewalks are related to increased outdoor
fall rates. Walkability and transit-accessibility are also related to increased falls after controlling for sociodemographic variables, as accessible environments attract more walking and street activities. The analysis of
violent crime or property crime, and pedestrian involved crash will be tested to see the relationship between fall
incidence and neighborhood safety. The findings will help develop the foundation of understanding falls-related
risk factors in the neighborhood environment, which can be especially beneficial to health and quality of life for
older adults who are at the highest risk of falling and being injured from falls. In terms of the fall-related cost
burden to the U.S. health care system, these findings help policy-makers develop a guideline to create agingfriendly neighborhood and implement effective ways to reduce fall-related environment risks. Hot-spot maps
of fall incidences can serve as useful resources for healthcare/EMS providers, as well as researchers, by clearly
showing locations of concentrated falls and facilitating proper interventions to make necessary modifications of
any hazardous conditions associated with specific hot spots.
References
 Ageing, W. H. O., & Unit, L. C. (2008). WHO global report on falls prevention in older age: World Health
Organization.
 Pinquart, M., & Sorensen, S. (2001). Influences on loneliness in older adults: A meta-analysis. Basic and
applied social psychology, 23(4), 245-266.
 Rubenstein, L. Z. (2006). Falls in older people: epidemiology, risk factors and strategies for prevention.
Age and ageing, 35(suppl 2), ii37-ii41.
 Steinweg, K. K. (1997). The changing approach to falls in the elderly. American Family Physician, 56(7),
1815.
 Wang, Z., & Lee, C. (2010). Site and neighborhood environments for walking among older adults. Health
& place, 16(6), 1268-1279.

Abstract Index #: 498
OVER-REGULATION AND UNDER-INVESTMENT: PLANNERS'S RESPONSE TO comminuty' EFFORTS TO
STRENGTHEN FOOD system
Abstract System ID#: 958
Individual Paper
RAJA, Samina [University at Buffalo, SUNY] sraja@buffalo.edu, presenting author, primary author
KHOJASTEH, Maryam [University at Buffalo, SUNY] mkhojast@buffalo.edu
HODGSON, Kimberley [Cultivating Healthy Places] kim@chplaces.com
CLARK, Jill [The Ohio State University] clark.1099@osu.edu
DIAO, Chunyuan [University at Buffalo, SUNY] chunyuan@buffalo.edu
The last two decades have witnessed the rise of a national movement to revitalize, re-localize, and rebuild
communities’ food system. The number of community gardens, urban farms, farmers markets, community
supported agriculture farms, etc. are but a few of the signs of a growing food movement (Hodgson et al. 2011).
This food movement, which arose out of concerns for food security, social justice, and economic justice (Gottlieb
and Joshi 2013), emerged with little to no involvement of planners. Indeed, in a well-cited article, planning
scholars Pothukuchi and Kaufman (2000) wondered why food was a stranger to the planning table. Today,
however, food is no longer a stranger to planning.
In the last decade, planners and local governments across the United States have responded to calls for action by
engaging in food system by deploying a host of planning and policy tools (Hodgson 2012; Neuner et al 2011; Raja
et al 2008). Some local governments are preparing comprehensive food system plans while others are offering
tax incentives to foster their comminuty’ food businesses. This is, some would argue, a heady time for food
systems planning. Yet this turn in planning warrants great caution about the purpose of local government
planning intervention in the food system and, therefore, great clarity about the means by which they do so.

This paper critically examines contemporary local government planning intervention in the food system. Drawing
on cross-sectional data from a 2014 national survey of APA members (n=1,169) who work for local governments,
this paper describes how local governments in the United States are heeding calls to use public policy and
planning to intervene in their comminuty’ food system. Although planners report that local governments are
engaging in food system planning – about 13% of respondents reported food system planning as a significant
priority in their work – they are doing so with a narrow understanding of their role. Specifically, local
governments are using policy tools to regulate and control rather than invest and revitalize comminuty’ food
systems. Logistical regression models highlight the factors are most likely to explain choice of particular policy
tool in addressing food system concerns. The paper concludes with cautionary notes for the future of food
systems planning, and offers suggestions on how planners may broaden their approach to strengthening their
communities’ food system.
References
 Gottlieb, Robert and Anupama Joshi. 2010. Food Justice. MIT Press.
 Hodgson, Kimberley. 2012. Planning for Food Access and Community-Based Food system: A National
Scan and Evaluation of Local Comprehensive and Sustainability Plans. Chicago, IL: American Planning
Association.
 Neuner, Kailee, Sylvia Kelly, and Samina Raja. 2011. Planning to Eat: Innovative Local Government Plans
and policy to Build Healthy Food system in the United States (pp. 39). Buffalo, NY: University at
Buffalo, The State University of New York.
 Pothukuchi, Kami and Jerome Kaufman. 2000. The food system: A stranger to urban_planning. Journal of
the American Planning Association, 66 (2): 113:24
 Raja, Samina, Born, Branden, & Kozlowski Russell, Jessica. (2008). A Planners Guide to Community and
Regional Food Planning: Transforming Food Environments, Building Healthy comminuty. Chicago, IL:
American Planning Association.

Abstract Index #: 499
THE IMPACT OF FRAGMENTED GOVERNANCE ON HEALTH DISPARITIES AMONG RACIAL MINORITIES
Abstract System ID#: 981
Individual Paper
KIM, Yonsu [University of California, Irvine] yonsuk@uci.edu
Advocates of public choice theory argue that the fragmented governance promotes competition among local
governments, and achieves economic and allocative efficiency by providing more customized public goods and
services at the local level. Scholars tested if fragmented and decentralized governance is associated with a
decrease in public expenditure, but found mixed results depending on measures of political fragmentation, which
refers to the process of redistributing functions and powers away from central authority. Unlike those studies
focusing on economic efficiency, few studies have examined the association between political fragmentation and
population health from the perspective of social equity. This study aims to explore the development of political
fragmentation along with population increase and urbanization in the US, and to conduct empirical tests, which
illuminate the mechanism between fragmented governance, racial segregation, and population health.
This study examines a link between political fragmentation and racial disparities in mortality rate analyzing
historical data of local governments, population, and mortality in the US metropolitan area when political
fragmentation occurred frequently. The longitudinal study identifies the causal relation between political
fragmentation and health disparities among racial minorities in metropolitan area. The spatial data also allows
me to discover the more detailed channel from political fragmentation to health outcomes by focusing on causespecific mortality and specific area that experienced a dramatic transformation in urban governance.
I use as independent variable political fragmentation indices by applying different measures that prior studies
have employed over 381 MSAs in the US from 1970 to 1988. Dependent variables include age specific mortality
rates and racial difference of mortality rates, which would result from urban governance. I use a fixed effect

Poisson model controlling for income, education, racial segregation, population density, and other variables that
show significant correlation with fragmented governance and mortality rates.
The empirical results of this study explain the mechanism that political fragmentation accelerated racial
segregation, which in turn led to racial disparities in health as the residents in the racially segregated
communities were less exposed to the resource of health promotion, educational opportunity, and other public
services. Contrary to the more fragmented local government that seeks uniformity, the less fragmented
governance appears to promote diversity and upward mobility among racial minorities, and to contribute to
stronger integration of economy, race, and education. The findings suggest that political fragmentation
deteriorates racial difference in community health although it remains controversial as to whether fragmented
governance improves competitive and allocative efficiency.
References
 Hutson, M.A., Kaplan, G.A., & Ranjit, N. et al. (2012). Metropolitan fragmentation and health disparities:
Is there a link?, The Milbank Quarterly, 90(1), 187-207.
 Judd, D.R. & Swanstrom, T.R. (2009). City politics: The political economy of urban America (7th ed.). New
York: Longman.
 Kim, J.H & Jurey, N. (2013). Local and regional governance structures: Fiscal, economic, equity, and
environmental outcomes, Journal of Planning Literature, doi: 10.1177/0885412213477135.
 Polednak, A.P. (1996). Segregation, discrimination and mortality in U.S. blacks. Ethnicity and Disease, 6.
99-108.
 Tiebout, C. M. (1956). A pure theory of local expenditures. Journal of Political Economy 64, 416–424.

Abstract Index #: 500
THE LEGAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF FOOD SYSTEM POLICY IN THE MADISON, WI RURAL-URBAN INTERFACE
Abstract System ID#: 994
Individual Paper
SUERTH, Lauren [University of Wisconsin-Madison] lsuerth@wisc.edu
Generally speaking, there are two types of food system in the United States: mainstream (i.e., commodity
agriculture) and community-based (i.e., food produced and consumed in the same regional area). Federal, state,
and local governments have focused on policy that support the mainstream food system for most of the 20th
century, where federal policy address the economic conditions of farming and state and local regulations zone
land for agricultural uses. Since Kameshwari Pothukuchi and Jerome Kaufman’s seminal article on the food
systems planning in 2000, local governments have increasingly recognized the importance of community-based
systems and used their police power to permit farming practices throughout their city.
When you compare the scope and influence of federal policy to state and local regulations, it is clear that the
federal government dominates food system policy for both mainstream and community-based system. There
are several reasons for this condition but the primary factor is the Farm Bill because it permits the U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA) to subsidize income and crop insurance if farmers produce commodity crops.
This guarantees a stable income for mainstream farmers and does not provide the same benefits to communitybased farmers. Most state and local governments implement policy and program to preserve farmland but do
not address what the farmers produce or whether it is economically viable. In other words, state and local food
policies primarily view agriculture as a  land_use and not as an industry, yet farmland preservation studies
recognize that landowners need a financial incentive to use their land for agriculture.
This disparity has driven my interest in food policy and more specifically, the ability of local governments to
promote community-based food system in the rural-urban interface through exercising their police power. The
paper presents the findings from a pilot study on four Fairshare CSA Coalition farmers within the rural-urban
interface of Madison, WI. It analyzes how they perceive and interact with federal, state, and local food system
policies. The objective is to document the web of laws that influence farmers in the Madison area and to

understand the effects of existing initiatives. The study applies an inductive approach understanding food policy
and it is based on a document review of federal, state, and local policy and farmer interviews.
Robust food system require robust  land_use policy, and I hypothesize that the existing methods are not an
effective way to facilitate community based food system. It is important to evaluate federal, state, and local
policies together because food system are complex and multiple regulations not only affect each component of
the system but also a single parcel of land. This analysis yields valuable insight for state and local governments
that want to promote agriculture in their rural-urban interface.
References
 Clark, J. K., Inwood, S. M., & Jackson-Smith, D. (2014). Exurban farmers’ perceptions of  land_use policy
effectiveness: Implications for the next generation of policy development. Journal of Agriculture, Food
Systems, and Community Development, 5(1), 1–17.
 Daniels, T. (1999). When City and Country Collide: Managing Growth in the Metropolitan Fringe.
Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
 Daniels, T., & Bowers, D. (1997). Holding Our Ground: Protecting America’s Farms and Farmland.
Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
 Neff, R. (Ed.). (2015). Introduction to the U.S. Food System: Public Health, Environment, and Equity. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
 Oberholtzer, L., Clancy, K., & Esseks, D. J. (2010). The future of farming on the urban edge: Insights from
fifteen U.S. counties about farmland protection and farm viability. Journal of Agriculture, Food system,
and Community Development, 1(2): 59–75.

Abstract Index #: 501
EXPLORING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN HEALTHCARE ACCESSIBILITY AND URBAN SPRAWL
Abstract System ID#: 1015
Individual Paper
BEJLERI, Ilir [University of Florida] ilir@ufl.edu, presenting author, primary author
YOON, Sulhee [University of Florida] sulhee777@ufl.edu
STEINER, Ruth [University of Florida] rsteiner@dcp.ufl.edu
NEFF, Donna [University of Central Florida] Donna.Neff@ucf.edu
HARMAN, Jeffery [University of Florida] jharman@PHHP.UFL.EDU
LUTZ, Barbara [University of Florida] lutzb@uncw.edu
BUMBACH, Michael [University of Florida] mbumbach@ufl.edu
Background:
When measuring healthcare accessibility, an important variable to consider is the spatial distribution of urban
patterns, in particular urban sprawl. Using Florida as a study area, this study explores the relationship between
measures of urban sprawl and healthcare accessibility. Specifically, this study presents an enhanced
methodological approach utilizing spatial measures of accessibility and urban sprawl.
Study Design:
The methodological goal is to relate traditional measurements of accessibility (travel time) to urban sprawl
measures of statistical significance. Urban sprawl measures are adopted from Galster et al (2001) and Tsai (2005)
who employ metrics to describe land development spatially. A linear regression model is used to explore the
relation of healthcare accessibility to urban sprawl. Independent variables include size, density, clustering
(concentration), and centrality of the residential area. The depended variable, travel time, is represented by
drive time area which are delineated using network analysis to calculate travel time from residential area to the
nearest healthcare provider.

The 2010 census blockgroups are used for population data and Florida property parcel data are used for the
residential area information. Primary care physician (PCP) data available from American Medical Association
(AMA) are used to map the location of healthcare providers.
Preliminary Results:
Initially the model is applied at a single county level. At this level the linear regression model results suggest that
urban sprawl is significantly associated with increased travel time of residential area to healthcare providers.
Higher correlations are observed in particular with variables of density and clustering pattern (p<0.05).
Conclusion/Contribution:
This study develops methods that incorporate urban sprawl measures into the estimation of healthcare
accessibility. Further application of this methodology to the rest of US will contribute to further understanding of
healthcare accessibility and spatial urban development that affect comminuty and residential clustering or
sprawl patterns, in particular regarding health disparities and access to health care for specific populations.
References
 Ewing, R., Schmid, T., Killingsworth, R., Zlot, A., & Raudenbush, S. (2008). Relationship between urban
sprawl and physical activity, obesity, and morbidity. In Urban Ecology (pp. 567-582). Springer US.
 Ewing, R., Brownson, R. C., & Berrigan, D. (2006). Relationship between urban sprawl and weight of
United States youth. American journal of preventive medicine, 31(6), 464-474.
 Galster, G., Hanson, R., Ratcliffe, M. R., Wolman, H., Coleman, S., & Freihage, J. (2001). Wrestling sprawl
to the ground: defining and measuring an elusive concept. Housing policy debate, 12(4), 681-717.
 Handy, S. L., Boarnet, M. G., Ewing, R., & Killingsworth, R. E. (2002). How the built environment affects
physical activity: views from urban_planning. American journal of preventive medicine, 23(2), 64-73.
 Tsai, Y. H. (2005). Quantifying urban form: compactness versus' sprawl'. Urban studies, 42(1), 141-161.

Abstract Index #: 502
DID DATA FROM THE GULF OIL SPILL CONTRADICT OFFICIAL PUBLIC HEALTH ANNOUNCEMENTS MADE DURING
THE DISASTER?
Abstract System ID#: 1058
Individual Paper
NANCE, Earthea [Texas Southern University] NanceEA@tsu.edu, presenting author, primary author
KING, Denae [Texas Southern University] kingdw@tsu.edu
The US environment Protection Agency (EPA) concluded that air emissions from the 2010 Gulf oil spill caused
temporary irritation but no long-term public health  impact. The purpose of our study was to examine whether
air quality data gathered during the oil spill supported EPA’s conclusion. Fine particulate matter and benzene
were the selected pollutants. The study analyzed data gathered during the oil spill and compared the results to
the Air Quality Index, Clean Air Act standards, National Air Toxics risk assessments, health-based guidelines, and
background levels. By all measures, particulate matter and benzene were generally higher during the oil spill
than during previous years, and both exceeded all relevant health-based standards and guidelines in all of the
parishes studied. Fine particulate matter and benzene levels in six Southeast Louisiana parishes were high
enough during the oil spill to cause short-term and long-term public health effects, with disparities in coastal
areas that were closer to the spill. These findings raise questions about the adequacy of official communication
to the public about the environment health risks associated with the Deepwater Horizon oil spill.
References
 James, W.; Jia, C.; Kedia, S. “Uneven Magnitude of Disparities in Cancer Risks from Air Toxics.”
International Journal of environment Research and Public Health 2012, 9, 4365-4385.
 de Gouw, J.A.; Middlebrook, A.M.; Warneke, C.; Ahmadov, R.; Atlas, E.L.; Bahreini, R.; et al. “Organic
Aerosol Formation Downwind from the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill.” Science 2011, 331, 1295.






Middlebrook A.M.; Murphy D.M.; Ahmadov R.; Atlas E.L.; Bahreini R.; Blake D.R.; Brioude J.; de Gouw
J.A.; Fehsenfeld F.C.; Frost G.J.; et al. “Air Quality Implications of the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 2012, 109(50):202805.
Peters, J.; Theunis, J.; Van Poppel, M.; Berghmans. P. “Monitoring PM10 and Ultrafine Particles in Urban
Environments Using Mobile Measurements.” Aerosol and Air Quality Research, 2013, 13: 509–522.
Solomon, G.; Janssen, S. “Health Effects of the Gulf Oil Spill.” Journal of the American Medical
Association. 2010, 304 (10): 1118-1119.

Abstract Index #: 503
FROM WALKING ON THE RAIL TO USING THE TRAIL TO GET TO SCHOOL: GREENWAYS AS AN ACTIVE
NEIGHBORHOOD DESIGN STRATEGY FOR SCHOOLCHILDREN
Abstract System ID#: 1067
Individual Paper
TAYLOR, Crystal [Florida State University] cjtaylor@fsu.edu
Children’s advocates have argued that planners should give special consideration to the needs of youth as the
neighborhood plays a significant role in a child’s development (Berg & Medrich, 1980; Ward, 1978).
Unfortunately, children are not spending as much time outside and they are not as active as they have been in
past generations (Freeman & Tranter, 2011). As a common planning practice, active neighborhood design
strategies have traditionally included green spaces for children to recreate. Though green spaces are well
established as environments that support children’s recreation, greenways are often viewed as an amenity for
adults. There is a lack of research featuring youth and ethnic minorities as greenway users (Starnes et al., 2011).
Other than home, schools are a major destination for children traveling within their community. Therefore,
greenways routed nearby school properties serve as an ideal setting to explore youth and children as trail users.
Though limited research exists concerning schoolchildren using greenways for recreation, there is a gap in the
literature concerning whether greenways can serve as an environment support for children’s active travel to
school. Even though there is not literature focusing specifically on greenways as a safe path to school, I build off
of two distinct and extensive bodies of literature on greenways (e.g., Starnes et al. 2011) and active travel to
school (e.g., McMillan, 2005) as foundations for my study. My research determines to what extent youth and
children are greenway users and if they are using the local greenway to travel to school.
I focus on a greenway in Whittier, California because it is routed nearby several schools. Also, it is an urban area
with sufficient density where children’s active travel to school is more likely to occur than in more rural settings.
To determine children’s greenway use and active travel behaviors, I employed survey methodology at three
schools. I adapted the nationally recognized Safe Routes to School survey to include greenway use and behaviors
questions. As the population characteristics of the schools are largely Latino, I distributed surveys in both English
and Spanish.
An analysis of the survey results reveals that both children and youth use the greenway as a recreational amenity.
The high school students’ most common use of the greenway was traveling to destinations within their
community. From a sample of active travelers, the results show that greenways may make it easier for high
school students to walk or cycle to school compared to walking or cycling through neighborhood. In terms of
policy implications, evidence from this research suggests that a greenway intervention near schools may be a
viable strategy worth further testing to promote active travel to school in other comminuty.
References
 Berg, M., & Medrich, E. (1980). Children in four neighborhood: The physical environment and its effect
on play and play patterns. Environment and Behavior, 12, 320-348.
 Freeman, C., & Tranter, P. (2011). Children and their urban environment: Changing worlds. London:
Taylor & Francis Ltd.






McMillian, T. (2005). Urban Form and a Child's Trip to School: The Current Literature and a Framework
for Future Research Urban Form and a Child's Trip to School: The Current Literature and a Framework for
Future Research, Journal of Planning Literature, 19, 440.
Starnes, H., Troped, P., Klenosky, D., Doehring, A. (2011). Trails and physical activity: A review. Human
Kinetics, 8, 1160-1174.
Ward, C. (1978). The Child in the City. London: The Architectural Press Ltd.

Abstract Index #: 504
SOCIAL, ECONOMIC, AND HEALTH DATA UTILIZATION IN LOCAL PLANNING AND SERVICES ASSESSMENTS: A
CASE STUDY IN EL PASO, TEXAS
Abstract System ID#: 1068
Individual Paper
BIERLING, David [Texas A&M University] dhb@tamu.edu, presenting author, primary author
LI, Wei [Texas A&M University] wli@tamu.edu
Effects of planning program and services on comminuty and their vulnerable populations requires careful
consideration of a variety of factors , including social, economic, and health data (Lindell & Perry, 2004). Social,
economic, and health data can be used to develop indicators that can influence decision-making and measure
policy effects, including indicators that are of high priority for sustainable planning (Litman, 2007). This paper
reviews development of vulnerability constructs that integrate socio-economic-health measures (e.g., Burton &
Cutter, 2008; Schmidtlein, et al, 2008; Tate, 2012). The paper then describes how these types of data sources
have been utilized by local agencies engaged in various aspects of community planning in the El Paso, Texas
Metropolitan Area. Next, the paper describes how five major planning documents—including transportation,
comprehensive, community risk and fire protection services, and heath assessment plans—either used or did not
use social, economic, or health data, including specific examples of data types and sources and how they were
actually used in the plans. Additional data needs are also described based on review of available sources. Six
recommendations are presented for improving social, economic, and health data availability and use in agency
and research applications, including training on data utilization, enhanced inter-organizational communication,
improving third-party data access, formal relationships with data research centers, identifying relevant variables
and underlying constructs with particular local applicability, and increasing data utilization in local planning
analyses.
References
 Burton, C., & Cutter, S.L. (2008). Levee failures and social vulnerability in the Sacramento-San Joaquin
Delta Area, California. Natural Hazards Review, 9(3): 136-149.
 Lindell, M.K. & Perry, R.W. (2004). Communicating environment Risk in Multiethnic comminuty.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
 Schmidtlein, M.C., Deutsch, R.C., Piegorsch, W.W., & Cutter, S.L. (2008). A sensitivity analysis of the
social vulnerability index. Risk Analysis, 28(4), 1099-1114.
 Tate, E. (2012). Social vulnerability indices: A comparative assessment using uncertainty and sensitivity
analysis. Natural Hazards, 63:325-347.
 Litman, Todd (2007). Developing indicators for comprehensive and sustainable transportation planning.
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board. No. 2017: 10-15.

Abstract Index #: 505
ACCESS TO HEALTHY FOOD RE-CONCEPTUALIZED: EXPLORING THE FIVE DIMENSIONS OF ACCESS
Abstract System ID#: 1100
Individual Paper
USHER, Kareem [The Ohio State University] usher.21@osu.edu

Although the construct ‘access’ is used frequently across many fields of practice and study, it remains
inadequately defined (Penchansky and Thomas, 1981; Ribot and Peluso, 2003). In some contexts access is
conceptualised as entry into or use of a ‘thing’ – a product or service. While in the context of local food policy,
access is conceptualised as a broad set of ‘strands’ or an aggregation of factors that influence residents’ ability to
acquire and benefit from healthy food (Penchansky and Thomas, 1981; Ribot and Peluso, 2003). However, in the
on-going discussions on urban food system, access is defined solely by objective measures such as socio-spatial
analysis, pricing, availability and volume. Qualitative methodologies are rarely utilised leaving elements of
perceived food quality, ideas about area crime and store environment out of our food access equation.
Consequently, we are left with only a partial view of access even though it remains a crucial element that  impact
food policy and ultimately, the health and well-being of families (Alkon et al., 2013; DeLind, 2006; McCormack
et al., 2007; Raja et al., 2010; Walker et al., 2010).
Through results from semi-structured interviews of key stakeholders involved with the Healthy in a Hurry Corner
Store Initiative and researcher-administered survey questionnaire of randomly selected households in four
Louisville, Kentucky neighbourhoods, this paper re-conceptualises access on five dimensions of perception –
Acceptability, Accessibility, Accommodation, Affordability and Availability. Finally, this research paper submits
that future food access policy should consider the Three Pillars of Access as a model to guide planners and
policy analysts.
References
 Alkon, Block, Moore, Gillis, Dinuccio & Chavez. (2013). Foodways of the urban poor. Geoforum, 48, 126–
135.
 DeLind. (2006). Of Bodies, Place, and Culture: Re-Situating Local Food. Journal of Agricultural and
Environmental Ethics, 19(2), 121–146.
 McCormack, Cerin, Leslie, Du Toit & Owen. (2007). Objective Versus Perceived Walking Distances to
Destinations: Correspondence and Predictive Validity. Environment and Behavior, 40(3), 401–425.
 Penchansky & Thomas. (1981). The Concept of Access: Definition and Relationship to Consumer
Satisfaction. Medical Care, 19(2), 127–140.
 Raja, Roemmich, Epstein, Yadav & Ticoalu. (2010). Food Environment, Built Environment, and Women’s
BMI: Evidence from Erie County, New York. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 29(4), 444–460.
doi:10.1177/0739456X10367804

Abstract Index #: 506
MAPPING AND MEASURING HEALTH CARE DISPARITIES: INTEGRATING SPATIAL AND NON-SPATIAL FACTORS
TO ASSESS ACCESSIBILITY TO PRIMARY HEALTHCARE PROVIDERS
Abstract System ID#: 1137
Individual Paper
YOON, Sulhee [University of Florida] sulhee777@ufl.edu
Access to primary health care plays an important role on achieving health equity and preventing chronic diseases
in the U.S (Gordon-Larsen et al, 2006). Access to healthcare involves both spatial and non-spatial factors. Spatial
access includes geographic distribution of healthcare providers in geographical area; whereas non-spatial access
is affected by geographical barriers that limit a user’s availability to access care and are typically measured by
socioeconomic factors (Wang and Luo, 2005). However, there are only unclear definitions of reasonable access:
improving the spatial accuracy of measuring accessibility and equity of accessibility to health care services.
This study aims to address two research questions: 1) What is the spatial extent of accessibility that can allow
general population to access primary care? 2) What non-spatial factors are associated with healthcare disparity
and how do they affect accessibility? This study presents a methodological framework to combine spatial and
non-spatial factors to assess the accessibility to primary healthcare providers.

To answer these questions, this study analyzes the accessibility in Jacksonville Metropolitan Statistical Area
(MSA), Florida. Availability of healthcare services is developed using a cluster analysis and by calculating travel
time based on the location of primary physicians. Next, the study investigates the effects of socioeconomic
factors identified in the literature and uses z-scores to understand how detailed aspects of non-spatial attributes
are associated with spatial healthcare disparity. Percentage of population under unemployment, below poverty,
without health insurance coverage, non-English speaking, and limited education are used as indicators that affect
healthcare disparity. Finally, spatial and non-spatial factors are integrated to identify area with poor access to
primary healthcare using a suitability model.
The population and socioeconomic data are from the 2010 Census, and the primary care physician (PCP) data are
provided by the American Medical Association.
The results show PCP clustering in the central and also the periphery of the urban core of Jacksonville MSA.
However, after consideration of both spatial and non-spatial factors, about 27.4% of population were
experiencing poor access to PCPs and they were concentrated in the periphery of urban core. These area exhibit
inadequate spatial access as non-spatial disadvantages associated with socioeconomic status, which can lead to a
shortage of healthcare providers.
References
 Gordon-Larsen, P., Nelson, M. C., Page, P., & Popkin, B. M. (2006). Inequality in the built environment
underlies key health disparities in physical activity and obesity. Pediatrics, 117(2), 417-424.
 Mao, L., & Nekorchuk, D. (2013). Measuring spatial accessibility to healthcare for populations with
multiple transportation modes. Health & place, 24, 115-122.
 McGrail, M. R. (2012). Spatial accessibility of primary health care utilising the two step floating
catchment area method: an assessment of recent improvements. International journal of health
geographics, 11(1), 50
 Wang, F., & Luo, W. (2005). Assessing spatial and nonspatial factors for healthcare access: towards an
integrated approach to defining health professional shortage area. Health & place, 11(2), 131-146.
 Wang, L., & Tormala, T. (2014). Integrating Spatial and Aspatial Factors in Measuring Accessibility to
Primary Health Care Physicians: A Case Study of Aboriginal Population in Sudbury, Canada. J Community
Med Health Educ, 4(284), 2161-0711.

Abstract Index #: 507
urban_planning AND DESIGN FOR SAFER comminuty
Abstract System ID#: 1139
Individual Paper
YOO, Seungjoon [Yonsei University] y999sj@naver.com, presenting author
LEE, Jeasun [Yonsei University] jeasunlee@yonsei.ac.kr, primary author
KIM, Minseon [Yonsei University] mslth@yonsei.ac.kr
KIM, Sungeun [Yonsei University] eun284@hanmail.net
Residential environment improvement projects of aged and poor residential area that are conducted recently
have objectives in improving residential environments and vitalizing comminuty. However, although projects of
residential environment improvement cooperating with community involvement bring positive effects on
forming a sense of community, they have limits on ensuring safety in public places. This means that if people feel
unsafe in using public spaces, the projects not only fail in developing successful residential area, but also
produce difficulties in forming a sense of community. Therefore, in this research, it has objectives in identifying
urban_planning and design elements that consider public safety and developing safer comminuty through
planning elements that are related to natural disaster, crime, and physical illness.
Method of this research is to draw planning and design techniques for safer comminuty and to suggest 'Safer
Community' model, by actually applying those techniques to selected target area.

The three urban_planning elements for 'Safer Community' model are: safe comminuty from natural disaster,
crime, and physical illness. All three planning elements emphasize forming a sense of community, and planning
elements for safe comminuty from natural disaster include urban design techniques such as reinforcing building
structures, detention facilities, educations and public relations, and natural disaster reduction facilities. Planning
elements for safe comminuty from crime include design techniques such as reinforcing territoriality, access
control, natural perception, strengthening activity rate, and maintenance control. Lastly, planning elements for
safe comminuty from physical illness include design techniques such as inducing physical activity rate and
healthier eating habits, and developing safer neighborhood and pleasant pedestrian environment. Therefore,
this research develops a safer community by applying these three planning elements and fourteen design
techniques to target area, and it suggests different community models on each elements.
This research is significant in applying three safe planning elements, from disaster, crime and physical illness, that
were not covered by formal residential environment improvement projects, and utilizing it as a base research for
safer community.
References
 Matthew et al. [Public Places-Urban Spaces], Architectural Press, 2003.
 Amanda Burden et al., [Active Design Guidelines' Promoting physical activity and health in design], City
of New York, 2010.
 "Healthy Spaces and Places." Healthy Spaces & Places. N.p., 2009. Web
www.healthyplaces.org.au/site/design.php
 Lee, Eun-Hye, Study on the Application of Crime Prevention Through environment Design for the
District Unit Plan, Korea University Graduate School, 2008
 Kim, Sang-Joon, A policy Implication for Community Resilience from Natural Disasters, Gyeonggi
Research Institue, 2013.

Abstract Index #: 508
PUBLIC HEALTH IMPLICATIONS OF NEIGHBORHOOD SAFETY
Abstract System ID#: 1143
Individual Paper
LEE, Chanam [Texas A&M University] clee@arch.tamu.edu, presenting author, primary author
WON, Jae Woong [Texas A & M University] jaewoongwon@neo.tamu.edu
ORY, Marcia [Texas A&M Health Science Center] MOry@sph.tamhsc.edu
LEE, sungmin [Texas A&M University] saint83@tamu.edu
TOWNE JR, Sam [Texas A&M Health Science Center] towne@sph.tamhsc.edu
FORJUOH, Samuel [Baylor Scott and White Health] SFORJUOH@sw.org
BACKGROUND: neighborhood are the most frequently used places for physical activity (PA) including walking.
Actual and perceived dangers may affect these behaviors. Neighborhood safety is an understudied determinant
of health, requiring urgent attention, especially given the association of preventable injuries and fatalities with
environmental hazards.
OBJECTIVE: We examined multiple domains of neighborhood safety as important predictors of health-related
outcomes among adults aged ≥50 years.
METHOD: Surveys (n=394) were administered in the spring and fall of 2013. Participants were recruited from the
patients registered in a regional healthcare network serving Central Texas. The survey provided personal
(demographics, socioeconomic status, health status/behaviors, socio-behavioral factors, and residential selfselection) and neighborhood perception variables. Neighborhood safety was assessed for four domains: (a)
traffic: e.g., volume, speed; (b) crime: e.g., visibility, lighting; (c) physical hazard: e.g., broken sidewalks, fear of
falling; and (d) socio-behavioral risk: e.g., distracted drivers, drunk people. Walk Score™ provided an objective,

accessibility-based measure of neighborhood walkability and was derived from area around each survey
respondent’s home.
The outcome variables included both health behaviors (PA, any walking, recreational walking, transportation
walking) and health outcomes (physical health, mental health, depression). All but the PA outcome variable were
binary, and logistic regression was used to predict the odds of walking ≥1 time/week vs. not; having good vs. poor
(feeling not good ≥1 day past month) physical/mental health; and feeling depressed ≥1 day/week vs. not. Linear
regression was used to predict days/week with ≥30 minutes of PA in the neighborhood.
RESULTS: After controlling for personal factors, the traffic safety domain was most important for all walking
variables. Crime, physical hazard, and socio-behavioral risk domains were more important for physical health,
mental health, and depression. PA was not strongly related to any of the safety domains. High Walk Scores were
associated with poor mental health.
Traffic Safety domain: Sidewalks were positively associated with physical health, mental health, and
transportation walking. Crosswalks/pedestrian signals were positively related to all walking and PA outcomes.
Respondents who walked for recreational purposes were more likely to perceive high traffic volume and exhaust
fumes.
Crime Safety domain: Proper lighting was linked with more transportation walking and good mental health. Being
able to see and speak with neighbors while walking was associated with more PA, recreational walking, and lower
depression.
Physical Hazard domain: Broken sidewalks and fear of falling were correlated with poor mental health and
depression, while drainage related issues (ditches, standing water, and flooding risk) were associated with
depression only.
Socio-behavioral Risk domain: Several variables were negatively correlated with mental health including
distracted drivers, lack of driver respect for pedestrians/bicyclists, drug activities, drunk people, and ease of
getting lost. Perceptions of drug activities were also associated with poor physical health and depression.
CONCLUSION/IMPLICATIONS: Several domains of neighborhood safety were associated with health-related
behaviors and outcomes. Improving traffic-related safety (e.g. installing crosswalks, pedestrian signals, and
sidewalks) appears most promising in encouraging walking. This is especially true for recreational walking among
middle-aged and older residents of small city. Smaller city typically have limited destinations to support
transportation walking. Reducing crime risks (e.g. installing proper street lights, improving police surveillance)
seems important for improving overall and mental health. Socio-behavioral risk factors (e.g. driver behaviors,
wayfinding) in neighborhood appear important as intervention targets for improving mental health.
References
 Fisher, K. J., Li, F., Michael, Y., & Cleveland, M. (2004). Neighborhood-level influences on physical activity
among older adults: a multilevel analysis. Journal of Aging and Physical Activity, 12(1), 45-63.
 Lee, C., Ory, M. G., Yoon, J., & Forjuoh, S. N. (2013). Neighborhood walking among overweight and obese
adults: age variations in barriers and motivators. Journal of Community Health, 38(1), 12-22.
 Loukaitou-Sideris, A. (2006). Is it Safe to Walk? 1 Neighborhood Safety and Security Considerations and
Their Effects on Walking. Journal of Planning Literature, 20(3), 219-232.
 Kerr, J., Rosenberg, D., & Frank, L. (2012). The Role of the Built Environment in Healthy Aging:
Community Design, Physical Activity, and Health among Older Adults. Journal of Planning Literature,
27(1), 43-60
 Loukaitou-Sideris, A., & Eck, J. E. (2007). Crime prevention and active living. American Journal of Health
Promotion, 21(4 SUPPL.), 380-389.

Abstract Index #: 509
PLANNING PERMACULTURE FOOD system IN A CHANGING CLIMATE

Abstract System ID#: 1183
Individual Paper
SPAK, Scott [University of Iowa] scott-spak@uiowa.edu
We seek to reduce the risks associated with climate change for permaculture, urban agriculture, and urban
forestry by providing new planning approaches and ensemble projections for how future ranges of street tree
and specialty crop species may migrate as extreme temperatures change. Many U.S. municipalities will need to
replant their urban forests in the coming decade in response to emerald ash borer and walnut twig beetle, in
ongoing efforts to apply urban agriculture and permaculture techniques to increase food security and enhance
resiliency in urban landscapes, and in developing new economic opportunities for local specialty crops.
Incorporating the effects of climate change on these system is a vital consideration for planners, but has yet to
be integrated into contemporary climate or food system plans. Urban agriculture and urban forestry have largely
been separate focus area, but agroforestry provides a connection between the two. Urban agroforestry is
unique in its focus on growing perennial woody food forests, combining the ecosystem benefits of urban forestry
with the food benefits associated with urban agriculture. Given the changes that will continue to affect urban
environments, contemporary planting plans should consider how species’ ability to grow in specific area will
change in the next few decades as a result of climate change. Our research attempts to reduce the risks
associated with making long-term decisions about urban trees and permaculture by providing planners with
detailed ensemble projections of future changes in range and yield based on the most recent IPCC simulations,
and communicating uncertainties relevant to operational planning activities.
Previous climate planning research has emphasized the effect of changes in precipitation patterns on annual
crops. Here we focus on extreme temperature events, a factor more significant than rainfall for perennials and
thus far underrepresented in urban climate adaptation plans and research. We employ projected daily
temperature across the continental U.S. at 1/8º resolution (8 km) from 20 global climate models and four
emissions scenarios for 2040-2100 in the downscaled Coupled Model Intercomparison Project 5 climate
projections archive (Reclamation, 2013). These projections are combined with American Horticulture Society
Heat Zone and USDA Plant Hardiness Zone classifications to map how changes in decadal extreme temperatures
may affect the range and yield of more than 100 tree species and specialty crops, and the composition of
symbiotic plant comminuty employed in permaculture gardens. Results consider both nutrition and ecosystem
function. We conclude that U.S. city would benefit from focusing on heat tolerance when making decisions
about new street trees, urban food forests, and specialty crops, with an overall increase in options for new
plantings.
References
 Reclamation, 2013. 'Downscaled CMIP3 and CMIP5 Climate and Hydrology Projections: Release of
Downscaled CMIP5 Climate Projections, Comparison with preceding Information, and Summary of User
Needs', prepared by the U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation, Technical Services
Center, Denver, Colorado. 47pp.

Abstract Index #: 510
THE IMPACT OF BUILT ENVIRONMENTS ON FARMERS’ MARKET USAGE IN A FOOD DESERT: A CASE STUDY OF
SFC FARMERS’ MARKET EAST IN AUSTIN, TEXAS
Abstract System ID#: 1201
Individual Paper
JIAO, Junfeng [University of Texas at Austin] hkujjf@gmail.com, presenting author, primary author
WEGMANN, Jake [University of Texas at Austin] jagw@utexas.edu
Food deserts are comminuty where residents’ access to affordable, healthy food is restricted or nonexistent
due to the absence of grocery stores within convenient traveling distance. Farmers’ markets have emerged as an
approach to improving the healthy food accessibility in food deserts. Most of these farmers markets run incentive

programs (FMIPs) as mechanisms to increase access to healthy food for low-income consumers and also to
channel dollars into the local food economy. However, studies across the US found that FMIP vouchers were
often unused due to different transportation barriers. Researchers argued that to solve food access problems we
should go beyond increasing the family budget and focus on more structural gaps within the neighborhood e.g.
the lack of public transportation, sidewalks, and streetscape (SFC, 2014). However, little is known about how built
environment really affect farmers markets’ usage.
To answer this question, this research will use the Sustainable Food Center (SFC) Farmers Market East Austin as a
case study area to investigate how the built environment around the market affects its usage. The SFC Farmers
Market East is located in the Chestnut Neighborhood in Central Austin, an area that traditionally has been
characterized by food scarcity and demographic segregation. It opens year around and on every Tuesday from 37pm and on average receive 600 customers per week (SFC, 2014)
To understand the built environment around this market, researchers used GIS to measure the built environment
within a half-mile buffer around the location. The spatial distribution and density of different land-uses and the
availability of transportation facilities (e.g. bus stops, bus frequencies, bike facilities, sidewalks, intersection, and
crosswalks) were quantified. The streetscape around the market was divided into edges and regions based on
architectural theory and through computer imaging software. This enabled researchers to analyze streetscape as
an arrangement of regions or elements with particular relationship. The market usage data was collected
through customer surveys which included their travel information, food purchase spending, and overall
satisfaction to the market. Statistical analysis (T-test, ANOVA test, Chi-square test) was used to explore the
relationship between built environments and actual food market usage.
Preliminary results showed that sidewalk length, bike facilities, bus stop density, and bus frequencies were
positively correlated with the market usage. The appearance of graffiti and fences on streets were negatively
correlated with the market usage. Further analyses need to be done to fully understand the impact of built
environment on farmers’ market usage in food deserts, which would facilitate local governments allocating
limited resources to the comminuty with the greatest need.
References
 Sustainable Food Center. 2014. Annual Report for July 1, 2013- June 30, 2014. Retrieved from
http://sustainablefoodcenter.org/about/reports

Abstract Index #: 511
EFFECT OF HEALTHY CITY MOVEMENT ON RESIDENTS' HEALTH OUTCOMES
Abstract System ID#: 1233
Individual Paper
LEE, Jin Hui [Florida State University] jl13t@my.fsu.edu
WHO defines "Healthy City" as continually creating and improving its physical and social environments as well as
community resources, in which people can mutually support each other to perform all the functions of life and
develop their maximum potential. In this sense, we can assume that a city that adopts and implements the
healthy city related policy could provide better health resources in terms of built environments and public
services than those without such policy.
With regard to an individual's health, the social ecological model which has emerged in recent years takes into
account both internal and external factors, such as biological, behavioral, and environment characteristics,
while the germ theory, which was a dominant idea, claims health-related problems are caused by internal factors
only, that is, genetic characteristics and behaviors of an individual person. Particularly, the social ecological model
includes political environments as external factors. This is because built environment and public health services,
which play a critical role to promote physical activities and health status, are provided through public program
or policy. However, physical environment factors and practical services have been thought as a determinant of

individuals' physical activity and health status in urban_planning studies, whereas too little attention has been
given to the implication of policy adoption and implementation factors.
From the social ecological perspective, the purpose of this paper is to better understand the relation between a
city's health resources and its residents' health outcomes focusing on South Korean case. Health resources
include built environment characteristics, health services as well as adoption and implementation of health city
policy and related institutions. Health outcomes focus on body mass index (BMI) and self-rated health status. To
figure out determinants of individuals' health outcomes, this paper test the  impact of health resources on
residents' health outcomes at an individual, a local, and a city level by using hierarchical linear model (HLM). The
results can contribute to the innovation of health related public policy as well as urban_planning policy,
because finding determinants of individuals' health outcomes emphasizes the necessity of modifying related
policies at a local and a central level. In addition, it can evaluate present healthy city policy, and can provide
improvement direction.
References
 Corburn, Jason. (2005). urban_planning and health disparities: Implications for research and practice.
Planning, Practice & Research, 20(2), 111–26.
 Duhl, L. (1986). The healthy city: its function and its future. Health Promotion. 55–60. WHO.
 Frank, L., P. Engelke, & R. Jackson. (2003). Health and community design: The impact of the built
environment on physical activity. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
 Mintrom, Michael. (1997). Policy entrepreneurs and the diffusion of innovation. American Journal of
Political Science, 41, 738–70.
 McLeroy, K.R, D. Bibeau, A. Steckler & K. Glans. (1988). An ecological perspective on health promotion
programs. Health Education Quarterly, 15(4), 351–77.

Abstract Index #: 512
WALKING, OBESITY AND URBAN DESIGN IN CHINESE neighborhood
Abstract System ID#: 1235
Individual Paper
ALFONZO, Mariela [New York University] malfonzo22@gmail.com, presenting author, primary author
GUO, Zhan [New York University] zg11@nyu.edu
LIN, Lin [East China Normal University] linlin21@gmail.com
DAY, Kristen [New York University] kday@nyu.edu
China faces growing problems with obesity and chronic disease. In fact, one-fifth of all overweight or obese
people in the world are Chinese. Obesity and chronic disease in China has been linked to decreasing physical
activity and to other factors, especially changing diets and environment pollution. In the last two decades,
physical activity declined by over 30% among Chinese adults, including reduced walking and bicycling. While rapid
urbanization in its current form poses a threat to the health of Chinese city, it also presents an important
opportunity to adopt new, more sustainable, urban development patterns that include urban design that
supports active living. There is a pressing need to better understand the link between urbanization and obesity to
effectively target interventions.
Chinese city differ significantly from many Western city in terms of their urban design. Chinese city are
extremely dense compared to city in the USA or other Western countries; for example, the density of Shanghai
suburbs exceeds that of many urban neighborhood in Western city. Also, inward-facing or gated comminuty
are very common in China; a majority of residential buildings are oriented around internal courtyards or lanes,
surrounded by gates that create blank or inactive street facades. This design feature reflects historical patterns in
which daily life—including some forms of physical activity—was conducted ―inside the community. It is unclear
whether findings on the association between built environment features and walking and other physical activity
from Western city can be directly applied to China.

Research on the links between walking and the built environment in Chinese city is thin. The few empirical
studies conducted have produced some counterintuitive findings: in the Chinese context, high density has been
associated with reduced recreational physical activity and increased overweight. Extremely high density may limit
open space and parks, leaving little space for walking or other physical activity. Extremely high density may also
cause severe traffic nuisances and safety and pollution concerns, which could further discourage walking and
other outdoor physical activity.
However, existing research on these issues in Chinese city have measured built environment features
somewhat crudely, for example, at 13 districts for a city of 8 million people. At this level, the density measure
may be capturing confounding effects from some unobserved or unmeasured built environment factors.
This paper aimed to expand the fledgling evidence using a more inclusive definition of walking (for both travel
and recreation) and employing micro-scale measurements of built environment features at the street segment
level. This approach is expected to support a more nuanced understanding of the relationship between the built
environment, walking and obesity.
Six neighborhood with different built environment characteristics, located in the Chinese city of Shanghai and
Hangzhou, were studied. Data on walking and other physical activity and obesity levels from 1070 residents were
collected through a street intercept survey conducted in 2013. Built environment features of 527 street segments
were documented using the Irvine-Minnesota Inventory-China (IMI-C) environment audit. Data were analyzed
using the State of PlaceTM Index.
The results confirm the association of built environment features with walking in the context of Chinese urban
design. Walking rates, household income and Body Mass Index (BMI) were related; neighborhood with a higher
State of PlaceTM Index were associated with higher rates of walking.
The associations between "walkable" built environment features and walking established in existing research in
other countries, also held true in the case of Chinese neighborhood.
References
 Day, K., Alfonzo, M., Chen, Y., Guo, Z. & Lee, K. (2013a). Overweight, obesity, and inactivity and urban
design in rapidly growing Chinese city. Health & Place, 21, 29–38.
 Xu, F., Li, J., Liang, Y., Wang, Z., Hong, X., Ware, R. S., Leslie, E., Sugiyama, T & Owen, N. (2009).
Associations of residential density with adolescents’ physical activity in a rapidly urbanizing area of
Mainland China. Journal of Urban Health, 87(1), 44–53.
 Xu, F., Li, J., Liang, Y., Wang, Z., Hong, X., Ware, R. S., Leslie, E., Sugiyama, T & Owen, N. (2010).
Residential density and adolescent overweight in a rapidly urbanising region of mainland China, Journal
of Epidemiological Community Health, 64(11), 1017–1021.

Abstract Index #: 513
RULES FOR REGULATIONS: A HEALTHY comminuty PERSPECTIVE
Abstract System ID#: 1250
Individual Paper
JACOBSON, Thomas [Sonoma State University] tom.jacobson@sonoma.edu
We know that one of the most active topics in city and regional planning in the United States is the relationship
between the built environment and a range of public health concerns.  land_use planning to promote active living
and increase access to healthy food, for instance, is viewed as a way to reduce obesity, heart disease, diabetes,
stroke, certain cancers, and other chronic diseases. Among the outcomes to date has been the expanding
practice of incorporating “healthy community” considerations in comprehensive plans and other planning
documents, along with a variety of infrastructure, education, and incentive program to improve community
health. But, as the “planning for healthy comminuty” movement matures, we are likely to see it include more

regulations: prohibitions against certain things, requirements of others, and “impact fees” charged to developers
to address community needs associated with their projects.
 land_use and other environment regulations are constrained by a set of fairly well defined legal principles. But
even for regulations with a strong legal basis, there may be policy and political limitations that prevent their
imposition. For example, resistance may come from the perception that regulation is bad for the economy. And,
there is a general anti-government sentiment that calls into question a wide range of government actions,
including regulation.
In the face of these considerations, there may be value in articulating certain guidelines, beyond strictly legal
limitations, to shape new regulatory approaches aimed at promoting healthier comminuty. The core of these
“rules for regulations” may be ensuring that regulations actually deliver the benefits on which they were based
and that they do so in cost effective ways. But are typical planning practices equipped to provide the kinds of
analysis this will entail?
This paper will describe the evolving “planning for healthy comminuty” movement and the role that regulations
are likely to play in its future. It will go on to describe how those regulations might be configured and presented
to address resistance to them, focusing on both their health and economic benefits. The paper will also look at
how the methods of public health professionals might be imported into planning practice to provide, in effective
and efficient ways, “evidenced-based” support for this kind of regulation.
References
 Making Healthy Places: Designing and Building for Health, Well-being, and Sustainability, Dannenberg,
Frumkin, and Jackson, ed., Island Press (2011)
 Open for Business: Conservatives’ Opposition to environment Regulation, Layzer, MIT Press (2012)

Abstract Index #: 514
EARLY POST-DISASTER SHELTER RECOVERY IN FRAGILE STATES: A CASE OF THE 12 JANUARY 2010 HAITI
EARTHQUAKE
Abstract System ID#: 1260
Individual Paper
GANAPATI, Nazife [Florida International University] ganapat@fiu.edu, presenting author, primary author
RAHILL, Guitele J. [University of South Florida] gjrahill@usf.edu
Despite its importance, post-disaster shelter recovery remains an under-researched area. The main purpose of
this paper is to understand the challenges disaster survivors face during early shelter recovery in fragile states
and the mechanisms they use to overcome these challenges. Our research focuses on Haiti, a country which
relies heavily on foreign donors for running its operations. The research is based on fieldwork conducted in three
socio-economically diverse comminuty (PétionVille, Delmas and Canapé Vert) in Port au Prince following the
2010 Haiti earthquake. The paper’s data collection methods include twelve focus groups (n= 63); in-depth
interviews (n=54); two Town Hall Meetings; participatory site observation and review of secondary sources. The
paper suggests that the most significant shelter-related challenges disaster survivors faced in Haiti after the
earthquake included unequal access to shelter and shelter-related resources, lack of privacy, living next to
strangers, lack of voice in shelter recovery process, lack of care by their own government, corruption, and
evictions. It highlights the importance of leadership, social capital, faith and adaptive flexibility in helping Haitians
overcome their shelter-related challenges. It concludes with policy recommendations on shelter recovery for
national governments and international aid agencies that operate in fragile states.
References
 Aldrich, D.P. and K. Crook (2008) ‘Strong Civil Society as a Double-Edged Sword: Siting Trailers in PostKatrina New Orleans’. Political Research Quarterly. 61(3), pp. 379–89.







Quarantelli, E.L. (1982) Sheltering and Housing after Major Community Disasters: Case Studies and
General Observations. Columbus, OH: Ohio State University.
Olshansky, R. B., Hopkins, L. D. . (2006). “Planning after Hurricane Katrina.” Journal of the American
Planning Association, 72(2), 147-153and Johnson, L. A. (2012). “Disaster and Recovery: Processes
Compressed in Time.” Natural Hazards Review, 13, 173-178.
Peacock, W., Dash, N. and Zhang, Y. (2007). “Sheltering and Housing Recovery Following Disaster.”
Handbook of Disaster Research, H. Rodriguez, E. Quarantelli and R. Dynes, eds., Springer, New York.
Xiao, Y. and Van Zandt, S. (2012). “Building Community Resiliency: Spatial Links between Household and
Business Post-disaster Return.” Urban Studies, 49(11), 2523-2542.

Abstract Index #: 515
MEASURING TODAY'S QUALITY OF LIFE AND HEALTH TO GUIDE FUTURE PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 1281
Individual Paper
BOTCHWEY, Nisha [Georgia Institute of Technology] nisha.botchwey@coa.gatech.edu, presenting author
GUHATHAKURTA, Subhrajit [Georgia Institute of Technology] subhro@gatech.edu
Central Theme: This paper asks to what extent quality of life and health indicators are correlated at the
neighborhood level in the City of Atlanta after controlling for socioeconomic status. The Atlanta Neighborhood
Quality of Life and Health (NQOLH) Dashboard embodies the framework of the conference for health by
examining metrics across the city using novel geographic information system (GIS) data analysis, interpretation
and application. NQoLH demonstrates that neighborhood of residence directly affects one’s health outcomes and
quality of life, and that both are critical considerations in determining neighborhood planning and health
promotion strategies.
Approach and Methodology: NQoLH first develops a multi-attribute neighborhood quality of life index that
examines place-based amenities and the social and physical environment at the neighborhood level. Second, the
study assesses the status of neighborhood health based on measures of healthy food access, physical activity,
and mortality and morbidity in neighborhood populations. Finally, the study compares the indices across the 25
Atlanta neighborhood grouped by a socioeconomic status index.
Results: The results show that:
1) The relationship between neighborhood quality of life and health in Atlanta is significant; and
2) neighborhood with relatively high quality of life and high health indicators are found in all socioeconomic
neighborhoods categories.
Relevance to Planning Education, Practice or Scholarship: The neighborhood indicators identified in this study can
be used as a benchmark tool to aid policy and resource allocation decisions at the municipal scale. While this
data-driven case study is based in Atlanta, the GIS analysis and interpretation of data is replicable in other city.
Participants will answer place-based questions through an exercise using the interactive NQOLH website. This
experiential learning exercise enables participants to adapt the NQOLH dashboard to other regions and identify
ways of addressing health issues as they relate to specified social and physical environments.
References
 Botchwey, N., Lee, S., Leous, A., Guhathakurta, S. (2014). Neighborhood Quality of Life and Health in
Atlanta. In H. Etienne, & B. Faga. (Eds), Planning Atlanta (Chapter 13). Chicago, IL: APA Planners Press.
 Bukenya, J., Gebremedhin, T., & Schaeffer, P. (2003). Analysis of rural quality of life and health: a spatial
approach. Economic Development Quarterly 17(3): 280-293.
 Lee, S., & Guhathakurta, S. (2013). Bridging environment sustainability and quality of life in
metropolitan Atlanta’s urban comminuty. In Community Quality-of-Life Indicators: Best Cases VI, eds
M.J. Sirgy et al. Community Quality-of-Life Indicators Series. Heidelberg: Springer.




Raja, S., Ma, C., & Yadav, P. (2008). Beyond food deserts: measuring and mapping racial disparities in
neighborhood food environments. Journal of Planning Education and Research. 27: 469.
Sallis, J., Saelens, B., Frank, L., Conway, T., Slymen, D., Cain, K., Chapman, J., & Kerr, J. (2009).
Neighborhood built environment and income: Examining multiple health outcomes. Social Science &
Medicine 68: 1285–1293.

Abstract Index #: 516
URBAN AGRICULTURE AND LOCAL CLIMATE: INVESTIGATING THE POTENTIAL OF AN UNEXPLORED URBAN
HEAT ISLAND MITIGATION STRATEGY
Abstract System ID#: 1348
Individual Paper
HABEEB, Dana [Georgia Institute of Technology] habeeb@gatech.edu
Extreme heat events are responsible for more annual fatalities in the United States than any other form of
extreme weather [1]. Urban centers are particularly vulnerable to the threats of excessive heat as most city are
home to large populations of lower income individuals who often lack access to air conditioning or adequate
healthcare facilities. Urban populations are also more likely to be exposed to extreme heat due to the urban heat
island (UHI) phenomenon. As the global population continues to urbanize, the number of vulnerable individuals
will continue to increase making urban heat island mitigation strategies all the more important.
This research explores urban agriculture as an urban heat island mitigation strategy. Though previous work has
examined the role of vegetation in mitigating the UHI effect [2], the potential of urban agriculture as a mitigation
strategy has yet to be investigated. This paper presents the results of a land cover analysis, which investigates the
climate effect of converting the existing urban land cover to urban agriculture. The research is conducted in the
city of Atlanta, GA, as Atlanta has one of the fastest growing urban heat islands, and has exhibited significant
increasing trends in heat waves [3].
This paper is a continuation of previous research that investigated the conversion of underutilized properties,
such as vacant and distressed parcels, to urban agriculture using a local climate simulation model. In this analysis,
I employ satellite temperature data and land cover data to estimate how converting land to urban agriculture
impacts local temperatures. I also investigate how urban form at the neighborhood scale  impact the relationship
between urban agriculture and local climate. As such, I argue that urban agriculture should not only be placed in
cities but that the morphology of the built environment should be taken into consideration when selecting
locations for urban agriculture.
This research builds on work currently examining the potential of urban agriculture to effectively revitalize
neighborhoods with vacant properties and reclaim brownfield sites in urban area. When designing heat
mitigation strategies, it is important for planners and policy makers to quantify the difference between
vegetative approaches in order to understand the tradeoffs they are making climatically, environmently, and
socially. As such the results of this research can help guide planners when selecting between vegetative UHI
mitigation strategies and may further support the burgeoning urban agriculture movement.
References
 CDC, 2004. Extreme heat: A preventive guide to promote your personal health and safety. Atlanta:
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
 Lynn, B.H., et al., 2009. A modification to the NOAH LSM to simulate heat mitigation strategies in the
New York City metropolitan area. Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology, 48(2), pp.199-216.
 Habeeb D, Vargo J, Stone Jr B, 2015. Rising heat wave trends in large US city. Natural Hazards, 76(3), pp
1651-1665.

Track 9: Planning Education and Pedagogy
Abstract Index #: 517
SIMCITY IN THE CLASSROOM: EXAMINING GAMING SOFTWARE'S INFLUENCE ON STUDENTS' PERCEPTIONS OF
THE FIELD OF PLANNING.
Abstract System ID#: 72
Individual Paper
TERZANO, Kathryn [Westfield State University] kterzano@westfield.ma.edu, presenting author, primary author
MORCKEL, Victoria [University of Michigan] morckel@umich.edu
Background and Purpose: Educators have been using earlier versions of SimCity and other simulation software,
such as Civilization, in their classrooms for years. SimCity in particular has been used to help teach city/regional
planning (Gaber, 2007) and urban geography (Adams, 1998). Through using simulation software, students
develop problem-solving skills and what Gaber (2007) refers to as adaptive critical thinking skills, where students
must respond to changes in the game and make decisions on how to proceed. The latest version of SimCity
resolves a weakness that was present in earlier versions of the game; this latest version allows for interactive play
among students, where the decisions each student makes while playing can have lasting effects on their
classmates' simulated city. For this study, the researchers sought to examine whether the inclusion of SimCity
in introductory planning courses leads to students having greater interest in the course itself as well as the larger
field of study. The results of this study can help faculty in planning program decide whether to use this software
as a teaching tool.
Objectives: The study sought to compare students perceptions of the field of planning between two groups:
students in a regular Introduction to Planning course and students in an Introduction to Planning course that
included the use of SimCity in course activities and assignments.
Methods: The researchers administered a survey at the beginning and end of the semester to students in two
courses: a regular Introduction to Planning course and an experimental Introduction to Planning course. The
experimental section was identical in coursework to the regular section except that it also included SimCity
assignments. In total, 211 surveys were administered. The surveys asked about students’ perceptions of planning
as “boring,” “fun,” and “creative;” their overall interest in planning; and their likelihood to take additional
planning classes.
Results: Before taking Introduction to Planning, students in the “normal” condition (no SimCity) were statistically
significantly different from the SimCity condition. The “normal” condition students reported a greater overall
interest in planning and they indicated they were more likely to take additional planning classes. The end-survey
indicated that the normal condition students no longer differed from the SimCity students on those two
measures. However, differences in two additional measures emerged: the SimCity condition students reported
perceiving planning as more fun and more creative than their normal condition counterparts. Between the
beginning and end of the course, the SimCity condition students’ perceptions of planning as fun and creative
changed in a positive way (seeing planning as more fun and more creative), and this was statistically significant.
However, there were no statistically significant changes in how likely the SimCity condition students were to take
additional planning classes; their interest in planning; or their perceptions about how “boring” planning is. Within
the normal condition, the only statistically significantly change between the beginning and end of the semester
was in the students' interest in planning. Students reported a statistically significant decrease in their interest in
planning between the beginning and end of the semester.
Implications: These findings suggest that the inclusion of SimCity software in an introductory planning course may
lead to students perceiving planning to be more fun and creative. However, these perceptions do not appear to
relate to students’ overall interest in planning or their likelihood to take additional planning courses. Researchers
should use this as a starting place to examine what factors, then, would help students to become more interested
in planning.

References
 Adams, P. C. (1998). Teaching and learning with SimCity 2000. Journal of Geography, 97(2), 47-55.
 Frye, B., & Frager, A. M. (1996). Civilization, Colonization, SimCity: Simulations for the Social Studies
Classroom. Learning & Leading with Technology, 24(2), 21-23.
 Gaber, J. (2007). Simulating Planning SimCity as a Pedagogical Tool. Journal of Planning Education and
Research, 27(2), 113-121.
 Squire, K. (2005). Changing the game: What happens when video games enter the classroom. Innovate:
Journal of online education, 1(6).

Abstract Index #: 518
MAPPING THE RESEARCH DOMAIN, COLLABORATION AND IMPACT OF U.S. PLANNING SCHOOLS FROM 2000 TO
2014
Abstract System ID#: 216
Individual Paper
YANG, Tianren [Tongji University] tianren.yang@hotmail.com, presenting author, primary author
STIFTEL, Bruce [Georgia Institute of Technology] bruce.stiftel@coa.gatech.edu
urban_planning is complex and multi-faceted, far too much a singular definition or approach. The diversity within
planning is rooted in planning’s simultaneous occupation of multiple worlds. Based on previous research on
methods to examine research domain of urban_planning, this research paper is focused around three questions:
(1) How to measure the major research area of planning? (2) How are these major area connected (e.g.,
collaboration among institutions)? (3) What are the most active and impactful area, authors, and institutions?
Using approximately 3,000 publications (SCI, SSCI, and A&HCI from 2000 to 2014) of 439 planning faculty
members (based on the faculty list from ACSP Guide) in top 25 U.S. planning schools (based on school rankings
from Planetizen Guide), mixed method approach is employed including (1) bibliometrics study of publications by
categorizations, specializations, and keywords, (2) qualitative assessment of the correlations of the research
areas and planning schools by using social network analysis such as Aduna Cluster Map, and (3) activity-diversityimpact analysis to measure both the productivity and impactfulness of planning faculty and school, which
includes variables used by National Research Council such as total number of planning faculty, total number of
articles published by the faculty of school in last fifteen years, total number of citations to works by the program
faculty in the last fifteen years, and density as well as Gini coefficient of distribution of publications and citations.
The on-going changes in knowledge domain, collaboration and impact in U.S. planning have been measured,
visualized, and explored. Findings suggest: (1) major research area and their rising trends in recent fifteen years
such as environment and health, physical planning, community development, and cross-cutting area, (2)
stronger collaboration among planning schools and institutions, and (3) activity-diversity-impact correlation in
planning domain. Finally, the strengths and weakness of knowledge domain mapping are discussed, leading to a
call for other studies using different measures.
References
 Dempwolf, C. S., & Lyles, L. W. (2011). The uses of social network analysis in planning: A review of the
literature. Journal of Planning Literature, 27(1), 3-21.
 Goldstein, H., & Carmin, J. (2006). Compact, diffuse, or would-be discipline? Assessing cohesion in
planning scholarship, 1963-2002. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 26(1), 66-79.
 Sanchez, T. W. (2012). Academic Visibility for urban_planning and the Webometric Future. Available at
SSRN 2157789.
 Stiftel, B., Forsyth, A., Dalton, L., & Steiner, F. (2009). Assessing Planning School Performance Multiple
Paths, Multiple Measures. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 28(3), 323-335.
 Stiftel, B., Rukmana, D., & Alam, B. (2004). Faculty quality at US graduate planning schools - A national
research council-style study. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 24(1), 6-22.

Abstract Index #: 519
PARTNERSHIPS IN ONLINE DEGREE program IN PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 245
Pre-organized Session: Leadership, Partnerships, Infrastructure, Engagement, and Innovation: Online Degree
Programs in Planning
LARSEN, Kristin [University of Florida] klarsen@ufl.edu, presenting author, primary author
WIDMER, Jocelyn [University of Florida] widmerj@ufl.edu
SILVER, Christopher [University of Florida] silver2@ufl.edu
TALEN, Emily [Arizona State University] etalen@asu.edu
As online degrees become more common, concerns exist about recreating planning’s experiential and
collaborative learning environment virtually. Diminishing budgets, organizational restructuring at universities,
new technologies, global student interest, and demand by practitioners support online planning education. The
University of Florida embarked on a graduate online degree program in the fall 2012 semester and Arizona State
has more recently established an undergraduate online degree. As the two domestic pioneers in online planning
education, representatives from both program will discuss the opportunities and lessons learned associated with
establishing, growing, and innovating an online degree program in planning.
Overall, this panel will move beyond the individual course development and delivery process to focus on
challenges and opportunities that exist when bringing a collection of courses to scale to offer an online planning
degree program. The shared experiences we are assembling will speak to navigating the challenges and building
on opportunities by focusing on five benchmarks (leadership, partnerships, infrastructure, engagement, and
innovation) that both the University of Florida and Arizona State University are finding critical to successfully
building and sustaining a fully online degree program in planning.
This paper will focus on partnerships, specifically maximizing the strengths of existing
university/school/department resources and partnering to off-set weaknesses in area of marketing, course
development, teaching, and student retention; different types of partnership models (public-private, interuniversity, intra-university); opportunities and challenges associated with bringing new partners on board and/or
terminating relationships with existing partners as program dynamics change.
Using planning education theory to inform my critical analysis of these characteristics, I will discuss how we can
utilize the key concepts inherent to planning theory and practice toward delivering planning education online.
According to a recent article in the Chronicle of Higher Education, as program, particularly at the graduate level,
gain infrastructure and expertise in these area, they are pulling out of partnerships with private sector providers
and turning to the expertise inherent within their own institutions. At the University of Florida, this indeed
occurred with the graduate online planning degree. My paper will address this transition and its broader
implications for partnerships in delivering online education in planning.
References
 Allen, I., E. Seaman, and J. Seaman. 2013. Changing Course: Ten Years of Tracking Online Education in
the United States. Boston, MA: Babson Survey Research Group.
 Bacow, L. S., W. G. Bowen, K. M. Guthrie, K. A. Lack, and M. P. Long. 2012. Barriers to Adoption of
Online Learning system in U.S. Higher Education. ITHAKA S+R.
 Cunningham, T., J.Gannon, M. Kavanagh, J. Greene, L. Reddy, and L. Whitson. 2007. Theories of Learning
and Curriculum Design: Key Positionalities and Their Relationships. Dublin, Ireland: Higher Education
Institute of Ireland.
 Edwards, M. M. and L. K. Bates. 2011. “Planning’s Core Curriculum: Knowledge, Practice, and
Implementation.” Journal of Planning Education and Research 31(2): 172-183.
 Németh, J. and J. Long. 2012. Assessing Learning Outcomes in U.S. Planning Studio Courses. Journal of
Planning Education and Research 32(4): 476–490.

Abstract Index #: 520
USING CASE STUDIES IN THE CANADIAN UNDERGRADUATE TEACHING CONTEXT
Abstract System ID#: 283
Pre-organized Session: Bringing Practice to the Classroom
THOMAS, Ren [Urban Planing & Research] planningutopia@gmail.com
Case studies are widely used in both practical and academic planning. Case studies on local planning policy,
processes, and governance structures are used in the development and testing of planning theories, planning
research, and as a teaching tool in planning classes. Each year, hundreds of urban planners, architects, and urban
designers visit Canadian city and return home with policy ideas that are studied, adapted, implemented or used
as inspiration in their own city through policy transfer processes (e.g. Spaans and Louw 2009, Thomas and
Bertolini 2014). In turn, Canadian planners have adopted policy from European, Asian, and South American
cities. These transnational networks are important tools for policy learning and innovation (Stone 2004).
A major challenge in teaching planning in the Canadian context is the difficulty in finding Canadian planning
material for lecture development and reading lists. Typically, readings rely on American theory and scholarship,
creating the perception that planning techniques, policy and issues in the US are interchangeable with those in
Canada. As planning is context-specific and there are acknowledged barriers to policy transfer (Dolowitz and
Marsh 2000, Thomas and Bertolini in press), it is critical to introduce students to planning through the use of case
studies that use local governance structures and planning processes. Undergraduate students in particular can
understand how projects/policies/ program are initiated, developed, and implemented through the lens of cases
in rural area, towns, and city in their own provinces.
This paper focuses on the contributions of 31 case studies to Canadian undergraduate teaching in planning. The
cases range from research-based to practice-based, small centres to large metropolitan area, and top-down to
bottom-up approaches to planning problems. They are broken down into eight themes: transportation and
infrastructure planning, natural resource management, community development and social planning, housing,
urban regeneration, participatory processes, urban design, and urban form and public health. The paper outlines
the ways in which these case studies can be used to teach students about plan implementation, integrating
public participation, managing conflict and disagreement among stakeholders, and transferring policy ideas from
one context to another.
References
 DOLOWITZ, D. AND MARSH, D. (2000) ‘Learning from abroad: the role of policy transfer in contemporary
policy making’, Governance, 13, 5–24.
 SPAANS, M. AND LOUW, E. (2009) Crossing borders with planners and developers and the limits of
lesson-drawing. City Futures in a Globalising World. Madrid: University Rey Juan Carlos of Madrid.
 STONE, D. (2004) ‘Transfer Agents and Global Networks in the “Transnationalization” of Policy’, Journal
of European Public Policy, 11, 545–566.
 THOMAS, R. AND BERTOLINI, L. (2014) ‘Beyond the case study dilemma in urban_planning: Using a metamatrix to distil critical success factors in transit-oriented development’. Urban Policy and Research. DOI:
10.1080/08111146.2014.882256
 THOMAS, R. AND BERTOLINI, L. (in press). ‘Policy transfer among planners in transit-oriented
development’. Town Planning Review.

Abstract Index #: 521
DELIBERATIVE LEARNING: CONNECTING INTERNATIONAL urban_planning THEORY AND PRACTICE THROUGH
A CASE STUDY, PEER-LEARNING APPROACH
Abstract System ID#: 303
Pre-organized Session: Bringing Practice to the Classroom

HOEY, Lesli [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] lhoey@umich.edu, presenting author, primary author
RUMBACH, Andrew [University of Colorado Denver] andrew.rumbach@ucdenver.edu
One of the key challenges for internationally oriented urban_planning courses is the difficulty connecting
classroom learning to the realities of professional practice. While field-based courses are an attractive option,
they are costly and time-consuming for both instructors and students, and are therefore occasional, rather than
regular, components of an international planning education. As pedagogy in professional fields shifts towards
service learning and experiential education models, international planning educators must develop more flexible,
in-class pedagogical techniques that will immerse students in the unique contexts and scenarios they may find
themselves in as working professionals.
This paper outlines the theories, pedagogical approach and evaluation of a new teaching methodology for
international planning that combines peer-learning with a rich set of international development case studies we
co-created specifically for graduate instruction. The publicly available library of case studies were developed
based on actual scenarios with international planning practitioners and applied researchers who work with nongovernmental organizations, United Nations agencies, donor institutions and government offices from national to
local levels. The cases cover major topics germane to international planning, including transportation, housing,
water and sanitation, disaster planning, migration and more. The cases are used in-class, requiring students to
justify and debate how they would respond supported by assigned readings that cover major theoretical
frameworks, research findings, or policy approaches to the case topic.
Based on a mixed-method evaluation (e.g., case specific exercises, a pre-post course survey and concept map
comparison, and an end-of-term student evaluation and reflection), initial findings suggest that our methodology
allows students to apply abstract development theories and concepts to real scenarios and projects, learn more
deeply about the complexities of international planning approaches, and expand their geographic and
institutional knowledge base. The methodology also allows instructors to connect theory to practice through
robust case studies and to quickly identify which concepts students are struggling to understand or put into
practice.
References
 Watson, Vanessa. 2002. Do We Learn from Planning Practice? The Contribution of the Practice
Movement to Planning Theory. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 22: 178
 Brinkerhoff, D. and J. Brinkerhoff. 2005. Paths to international public service: The service-choice spiral
and implications for graduate education program. Journal of Public Affairs Education, 11(2): 73-82.
 Saville, Bryan K., Lawrence, Natalie Kerr, and Krisztina V. Jakobsen. 2012. Creating Learning comminuty
in the Classroom. New Directions for Teaching and Learning, 132.
 Sprain, Leah & Timpson, William M. 2012. Pedagogy for Sustainability Science: Case-Based Approaches
for Interdisciplinary Instruction. environment Communication, 6(4): 532-550.
 Wolf-Powers, Laura. 2013. Teaching Planners to Deal: The Pedagogical Value of a (Simulated) Economic
Development Negotiation. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 33: 348

Abstract Index #: 522
FROM CASELAW TO APPLIED LEARNING: APPROACHES FOR TEACHING AESTHETICS TO STUDENTS IN THE
PLANNING LAW COURSE
Abstract System ID#: 467
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session
WEINSTEIN, Alan [Cleveland State University] a.weinstein@csuohio.edu
JOURDAN, Dawn [University of Oklahoma] dwnjrdn@aol.com
STRAUSS, Eric [Michigan State University] strausse@msu.edu

All planning students and many others in related fields (e.g. public administration and urban studies) take a
required course in planning law. Instructors must make difficult choices about what to cover in these courses
because planning law involves a broad range of topics and requires that students gain a basic understanding of a
number of legal concepts with which most are unfamiliar. Many of our students will go from these classes to a
job in government where they are the only professional planner and are solely responsible for administering the
jurisdiction’s land-use ordinances. What these students quickly discover is that issues involving aesthetics – such
as design/architectural review, regulation of signs, and historic preservation review -- are among the most
frequent, and contentious, matters they encounter. Unfortunately, they also discover, at the same time, that
they learned very little about aesthetics issues in their planning law course.
We believe there is a mismatch between the importance accorded aesthetics issues in most planning law courses
and the importance of these issues in planning practice at the local government level. In this session, we propose
to demonstrate how each of us, teaching in different ACSP-approved graduate planning program, have
integrated teaching about aesthetics issues into the planning law course. While our approaches may differ, each
has the same goal: to ensure planning students understand the basic principles and issues that arise in dealing
with aesthetics issues at the local government level. These include: best practices and procedures for aesthetics
regulations, drafting/amending aesthetics regulations, administration of aesthetics regulations, freedom of
speech issues raised by aesthetics regulations, and knowing when to consult the local government’s attorney.
References
 Patricia E. Salkin & John R. Nolon, “Practically Grounded: Convergence of  land_use Law Pedagogy and
Best Practices, 60 J. Legal Educ. 519 (2011)
 Brian W. Blaesser, Chapter 8, “Design Review” in DISCRETIONARY  land_use CONTROLS (West 2014)
 Dawn Jourdan, Kathryn Hurd, H. Gene Hawkins, and Kimberly Winsom-Geideman, “Evidence-Based Sign
Regulation: Regulating Signage on the Basis of Empirical Wisdom,” The Urban Lawyer, Vol. 45, Number 2
327-348 (2013)
 Thomas Jacobson, “Aesthetic Regulation and Design Review" in California  land_use Practice, California
Continuing Education of the Bar (2006)
 John Costonis, ICONS AND ALIENS: LAW, AESTHETICS, AND environment CHANGE (U. Illinois Press
1989)

Abstract Index #: 523
THE STUDIO AS A PEDAGOGICAL DEVICE IN TEACHING REAL ESTATE FINANCE AND DEVELOPMENT
Abstract System ID#: 495
Pre-organized Session: Bringing Practice to the Classroom
CHARLES, Suzanne Lanyi [Cornell University] scharles@post.harvard.edu
Based upon the atelier-based training of the Ecole des Beaux Arts, the studio is the setting within which different
types of knowledge are synthesized. Although studios are a key feature of American architectural education, they
are a much less entrenched method of instruction in planning curricula. Moreover, the use of studios as a
pedagogical device in real estate finance and development courses is quite limited. In this paper, I examine the
potential of studio-based courses in teaching real estate finance and development.
This paper begins with a discussion of the history of the studio in architectural and planning education and
examines the educational theory behind studio-based education. I then document two examples of studios used
to teach real estate finance and development: an urban_planning studio offered at the Taubman College of
Architecture and urban_planning at the University of Michigan during the fall 2012 semester and an architecture
studio offered at the School of Architecture at Northeastern University during the fall 2013 semester. Using
student surveys, observation, and evaluation of students’ work, I critically examine and compare these two
examples.

Findings indicate that teaching real estate finance and development within a studio setting is a viable model of
instruction in that it provides students with an understanding of the complexities of real estate development,
fosters the development of analytical tools and techniques, and encourages students to consider market and
financial issues in tandem with physical plan making and architectural design. The paper offers suggestions for
improvement to the studio-teaching model and advocates for its replication in real estate and planning curricula.
References
 Lang, J. (1983). Teaching Planning to City Planning Students: An Arguement for the Studio/Workshop
Approach. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 2(2), 122-129.
 Long, J. G. (2012). State of the Studio: Revisiting the Potential of Studio Pedagogy in U.S.-based Planning
Programs. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 32(4), 431-448.
 Salama, A. M., & Wilkinson, N. (2007). Design Studio Pedagogy: Horizons for the Future. Gateshead, UK:
The Urban International Press.
 Schön, D. (1985). The Design Studio: An Exploration of Its Traditions and Potentials. London: RIBA
Publications for RIBA Building Industry Trust.
 Schön, D. (1987). Educating the Reflective Practitioner. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Abstract Index #: 524
INNOVATION IN ONLINE PLANNING EDUCATION: BEYOND THE TECHNOLOGY
Abstract System ID#: 576
Pre-organized Session: Leadership, Partnerships, Infrastructure, Engagement, and Innovation: Online Degree
Programs in Planning
WIDMER, Jocelyn [University of Florida] widmerj@ufl.edu
Online education is often touted as “the way of the future.” Because the future is inherent to planning practice, it
is only fitting that planning education be delivered online. Yet no longer is it innovative to simply package and
deliver one or a series of planning courses online. Innovation in planning education online necessitates the same
delicate balance between best practices and risk management as does innovation in planning education in the
classroom. And just as innovations in the field influence the way we teach planning, so too can innovations online
influence how we re-think planning education on-ground.
This discussion will move beyond the individual course development and delivery process to focus on challenges
and opportunities that exist when bringing a collection of courses to scale to offer an online planning degree
program, particularly focusing on area of innovation and engagement. The ways in which technology facilitates
these innovations will be explored, recognizing that online program delivery alone does not make for an
innovative learning environment.
Technology provides a way to synchronize innovations in the field with innovations in instructional delivery.
Innovation then is as much about change management in the theory and practice of planning as it is about
keeping up with changes in technology. The up-front commitment of resources and time required of online
education often stifles the opportunity for on-going innovation in the online learning environment, and content
can fall victim to university-supported Learning Management system (LMS). Seeking out strategies to liberate
discipline-specific content from the structure online delivery often imposes not only can improve how planning
education is delivered online at the course-specific scale, but also opens up the opportunity to package content in
various ways to accommodate the growing need for planning education to be more globally accessible.
Planning educators must keep pace with an ever-increasing global rate of change and provide opportunities for
students to engage with this rate of change. The virtual world that can be collaborative, democratic, and resilient
exemplifies the benchmarks used in planning by which we attempt to shape the world around us. The online
learning environment for planning students then can be designed to engage these very characteristics that are
fundamental to planning theory and practice, and that are also inherent to the virtual world.

It is increasingly necessary, then, to devise an engagement strategy for peer-to-peer, peer-to-professor, and
peer-to-professional dynamics while fostering relationships among and between these different categories of
stakeholders—all the while upholding the theoretical and professional threshold set by planning scholarship and
practice. This presentation will draw upon experiences gleaned by implementing a graduate degree program in
planning, whereby standards (e.g. professional, accrediting, and university-based) have not necessarily stifled the
innovative potential of online planning education, but in fact have been innovated by the ways in which online
planning education is increasingly delivered. The current reality is that increasing global program demands
outpace existing bricks-and-mortar strategies, so new “best practices” are needed as planning education
responds more generally through online delivery mechanisms.
To conclude, this discussion will share diverse models of innovation across the many content-areas of planning
education and also highlight opportunities for consistencies where impact can start to be measured. Innovation
can certainly drive how the leadership (universities, PAB) envisions online planning education; how partnerships
facilitate online planning education; and how infrastructure supports online planning education. The challenge
lies in designing an engaging online learning environment using change management strategies with content and
technology, and connecting a global constituent of stakeholders in much the same way we have engaged
innovation in bricks-and-mortar planning education up until the present.
References
 Bacow, L. S., W. G. Bowen, K. M. Guthrie, K. A. Lack, and M. P. Long. 2012. Barriers to Adoption of
Online Learning system in U.S. Higher Education. ITHAKA S+R.
 Fainstein, S. 2000. “New Directions in Planning Theory.” Urban Affairs Review. 35(4): 451-478.
 Khan, S. 2011. “Review of Transformative Pedagogy in Architecture and Urbanism by Ashraf M. Salama.”
International Journal of Architectural Research 5(1): 170-174.
 Long, J. 2012. “State of the Studio: Revisiting the Potential of Studio Pedagogy in US-Based Planning
Programs.” Journal of Planning Education and Research 32(4): 431-448.

Abstract Index #: 525
PREPARING THE FACILITATIVE PLANNER
Abstract System ID#: 632
Individual Paper
WILSON, Patricia [University of Texas at Austin] patriciawilson@utexas.edu
The attraction of socially aware students to the field of planning over the last fifty years has had a dramatic
impact on planning pedagogy. Since the advent of advocacy and contestatory planning in the 1960s, planning
education has incorporated the role of planner as change agent. In the 1990s a significant inflection point
occurred: the introduction of the reflective practitioner, with attention to the attitudes and values of the planner
and the planner's process of learning in action. This paper warrants that another inflection point has been
reached in the education of the planner as change agent: the introduction of the facilitative planner. With the
awareness of complex system and the process of emergent change, the planner must be comfortable in the face
of not knowing, of not being in control, and must be able to sense what is possible and emergent in the moment.
The planner becomes the facilitator of emergent system change. Using the pedagogy of participatory action
research, collaborative learning, and evolutionary system thinking, the paper draws out the implications for
planning education: how to prepare the facilitative planner. The paper illustrates the approach with a case study
of 30 planning students and practitioners in a field-based workshop in peri-urban Mexico.
References
 Peter Reason, Participative Inquiry and Practice
 M. Levin, Action Research and Transformation of Higher Education
 W. Torbert, Action Inquiry
 Banathy, Dialogue as Means of Collective Communication
 Laszlo, Evolutionary system Development

Abstract Index #: 526
PARTNERSHIPS IN ONLINE DEGREE program IN PLANNING - INFRASTRUCTURE
Abstract System ID#: 653
Pre-organized Session: Leadership, Partnerships, Infrastructure, Engagement, and Innovation: Online Degree
Programs in Planning
TALEN, Emily [Arizona State University] etalen@asu.edu
ASU’s new 100% online undergraduate planning degree – a Bachelor of Science in urban_planning – offers
students instruction in the analysis and synthesis of the physical, social, political and economic issues that shape
urban and regional development. Core courses provide training in planning analysis, theory, urban design, and a
variety of tools for conducting planning research, including methods such as GIS, surveys, population projections,
socioeconomic analysis, visualization, and modeling. These courses provide the basis for municipal planning and
review processes, and the skills needed to prepare environment statements and city plans. Students may focus
their elective courses in area such as neighborhood revitalization, public participation, housing, transportation,
environmental quality, hazardous waste, contemporary legal issues, and preservation planning.
The planning degree is supported by a campus-wide infrastructure devoted to online course delivery. ASU now
has 10,000 students pursuing on-line degrees. The majority of students are either overseas military personnel or
working students who have completed one or two years of college but never completed their degree. All courses
in the on-line degree program are 7.5 weeks. Planning faculty are currently engaged in modifying existing online
courses (“i-courses”), which have been taught for years, and transitioning them from 15-week courses to 7.5
weeks (“o-courses”) to match the online course requirement and schedule. I-courses and o-courses can be
merged, so faculty teach one overlapping course. To assist with transitioning to online courses, ASU Online has
been created as a separate department with its own staff and IT support, and has a development team that
provides financial, technical and instructional support to faculty in their course development.

Abstract Index #: 527
LEADERSHIP, PARTNERSHIP, INFRASTRUTURE, ENGAGEMENT AND INNOVATION: ONLINE DEGREE program
IN PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 690
Pre-organized Session: Leadership, Partnerships, Infrastructure, Engagement, and Innovation: Online Degree
Programs in Planning
SILVER, Christopher [University of Florida] silver2@ufl.edu
My contribution to the session will focus on issues surrounding leadership to advance online degree program,
and the challenges of maintaining academic rigor, fiscal solvency and market access when launching and
sustaining online degree program in planning. It involves addressing simultaneous multiple constituencies, each
with very different perceptions of the need for and the form on online learning. These constituencies include the
academic faculty who will teach in the program, the university administration that has often very distinct views
on the reasons for online learning, alumni who have a deep investment in the more traditional approaches to
planning education, and the current and future students who often share the same academic status whether they
are online or live learners. There is also the need to interact with the technician aspect of online learning, and
also the marketing (which may include a third party vendor). How to achieve success for the online program in
the eyes of these multiple constituents requires a leadership strategy as well as a good academic plan. Using
several initiatives in online program at the University of Florida, including the online planning program but also
bringing in the example of the larger UF Online initiative, the leadership challenges will be assessed.

Abstract Index #: 528
IMPLEMENTING A COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT SENIOR CAPSTONE PROJECT USING AN EQUITABLE LEARNING
MODEL
Abstract System ID#: 692
Individual Paper
MOHEBBI, Mehri [University of Cincinnati] mohebbmi@mail.uc.edu, presenting author, primary author
VARADY, David [University of Cincinnati] david.varady@gmail.com
Implementing a Community Development Senior Capstone Project Using an Equitable Learning Model
Mehri Mohebbi, M. Arch.* & David Varady, PhD.**
* AAUW Fellow, School of Planning, DAAP, University of Cincinnati, OH.
** Professor, School of Planning, DAAP, University of Cincinnati, OH.
(All authors have an equal role in this paper; their names are listed in alphabetical order).
In spring 2015, we developed and implemented the Bachelor of Urban Studies Senior Capstone course at the
University of Cincinnati. Students were expected to not only study a community development project but also to
participate in a seminar with assigned readings (DeFillipis et al, 2010; Spain 2001) and guest speakers—and to be
tested on this material. The students chose projects in Cincinnati, Detroit and three Chinese city covering
neighborhood revitalization, transportation planning and urban agriculture. Our main challenge was to create a
cohesive and equitable learning environment for a class that was half Chinese and half American. To address this
challenge we (1) included On-line discussion board activities as a part of the final grade, (2) included Chinese
examples as part of class discussion and (3) paired Chinese and American students with a requirement that each
student critique his/her “buddy’s” work and act as mentor and mentee at the same time. In the paper we will
report on the success of these efforts aimed at creating an equitable learning environment and on the overall
quality of the student projects.
References
 DeFilippis, James, Robert Fisher, and Eric Shragge. 2010. Contesting Community. New Jersey: Rutgers
University Press.
 Spain, Daphne. 2001. How Women Saved the City. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Abstract Index #: 529
SPECIALIZATION IN PLANNING EDUCATION: STRENGTHENING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN GRADUATE
PLANNING EDUCATION AND SUCCESSFUL PLANNING CAREERS
Abstract System ID#: 737
Individual Paper
WUERZER, Thomas [Boise State University] thomaswuerzer@boisestate.edu, presenting author, primary author
VOS, Jaap [Boise State University] jaapvos@boisestate.edu
There is an abundance of literature on the core skills and competencies that should be taught in planning schools
but there is very little written about planning specializations that should be offered.
While PAB provided some guidance about specializations in the late 1980s and early 1990s, there has been no
concerted effort to link specializations back to actual job opportunities and needs in the fields. We offer some
thoughts about the possible reasons for this disconnect and provide a model that could give some more insight
into the relationship between planning education, planning specializations and planning careers.
For this assessment, we analyzed specializations as noted in all editions of ACSP’s Guidebook for Planning Schools
since 1976. In our view, these four decades of planning education programming created the supply side of the
US planning education’s market and are base for our discussion of place-based planning education. Furthering an
early assessment by Krizek and Levinson (2005) on integrated  land_use-transportation planning as specialization,

we created (somewhat arbitrary) two groups of schools to represent dominant regional differences; west and
non-west and applied a location quotient of planning specializations.
Discussions about planning education probably trace back to 1948. Transformation and responding to a changing
profession are reasons noted by Howard et al. (1948) when pleading for a drastic change in planner’s education.
Friedmann (1996) pointed out that planning pedagogy is facing a paradigm shift with the needs to implement
implicit future trends. Edwards and Bates (2011) revisited Friedman’s call on re-assessing curriculum core
requirements while analyzing the change over the past 15 years. In the theme of the 55th ACSP conference and
changing job markets, we believe it is time to re-examine the past four decades of planning specializations and
present outlooks.
The second tier in our study, a comparison of the latest APA Planners Salary Survey with the specializations that
are being offered in planning program, shows that there seems to be a disconnect between the specializations
that planning program offer and the actual specialized knowledge used by practicing planners. These findings
are contrasted to the recent 2015 PLANETIZEN survey to fully comprehend the relationships between planning
education, planning specializations and planning careers. In doing so, we present a platform that conceptualizes
the planning skills and core competencies needed in matters of context, place, and the size of place.
Further, we present a planning education model that conceptualizes the planning skills and core competencies
needed in regards to market demands and planning careers. Lessons learned include the opportunities that a
place-based focus in planning education can offer to planning program.
References
 Edwards, MM, and Bates LK. 2011. Planning’s Core Curriculum: Knowledge, Practice, and
Implementation. Journal of Planning Education and Research 31 (2):172-183.
 Friedmann, J. 1996. The Core Curriculum in Planning Revisited. Journal of Planning Education and
Research 15 (2):89-104.
 Howard, JT, Burdell ES, Fortune M, Menhinick HK, and Orton LM. 1948. The Content of Professional
Curricula In Planning. Journal of the American Institute of Planners 14 (1):4-19.
 Krizek, K, and Levinson D. 2005. Teaching Integrated  land_use-Transportation Planning: Topics,
Readings, and Strategies. Journal of Planning Education and Research 24 (3):304-316.

Abstract Index #: 530
EVALUATING SERVICE LEARNING IN urban_planning EDUCATION: OUTCOMES FOR CLIENT ORGANIZATIONS
Abstract System ID#: 822
Individual Paper
PITT, Damian [Virginia Commonwealth University] dpitt@vcu.edu
This paper investigates the use of service learning in urban_planning education, focusing on the outcomes for
client organizations. In doing so it will address a major gap in the urban_planning pedagogy literature, as well as
in the broader literature on service learning. Within the urban_planning literature, numerous studies in the
Journal of Planning Education and Research and other publications have evaluated specific service learning
projects, often at the authors’ own institutions. These evaluations generally focus on student outcomes, in
particular the effects on students’ awareness of and sensitivity to issues facing client comminuty. The “lessons
learned” from these studies are typically aimed at enhancing service learning pedagogy in order to improve those
student outcomes. Similarly, the vast majority of publications from the broader field of service learning research
focus on the relationship between pedagogical approaches and student outcomes.
Improving service learning pedagogy in a way that maximizes positive student outcomes is certainly a worthwhile
cause. However, service learning in theory serves a dual objective: providing students with unique, “real-world”
experiences (Long, 2012) that “cannot be duplicated in the traditional classroom-oriented education” (Roakes
and Norris-Tirrell, 2000, p. 101), and involving them in community service activities that provide positive benefits

to individuals and community organizations. The benefits to community organizations are far less understood,
both within urban_planning literature and service learning research more broadly.
A few recent studies have taken a more holistic look at service learning in urban_planning and related fields, and
in the process have identified some benefits and challenges for community organizations. The benefits often go
beyond the mere infusion of free student labor, as students can come up with creative solutions to problems and
provide a type of expertise that may not otherwise be available to the client organizations (Littlepage & Gazley,
2013; Viswanathan, et al., 2012). Service learning program that involve direct interaction with community
members can also help to build community capacity and create a sense of opportunity (Roakes & Norris-Tirrell,
2000; Angotti, et al., 2011).
Potential challenges identified in prior research include increased expectations for client organization staff, the
need to work within academic semester schedules, and differences among student skills, experience levels, and
motivations (Angotti, et al. 2011; Littlepage & Gazley, 2013). Recommendations include involving clients in
course design (Viswanathan, et al., 2012), better aligning course objectives with organizational needs (Roakes
and Norris-Tirrell, 2000), setting realistic objectives and timelines, and establishing clear boundaries between
faculty and client roles (Angotti, Doble, & Horrigan, 2011).
My paper will build upon the limited prior research on this topic by directly investigating the outcomes of urban
planning service learning projects for client organizations. The primary research questions are “what benefits
and challenges does urban_planning service-learning present for client organizations” and “how can urban
planning service learning better meet the needs of client organizations?”
The research will consist of a survey of urban_planning program directors, interviews with service learning
instructors, and interviews with representatives of client organizations. The initial survey will identify the
prevalence of various service learning approaches in urban_planning pedagogy (e.g., full-course vs. component of
course, direct vs. indirect service). The interviews will then investigate the benefits and challenges associated
with these different approaches, in terms of client  impact, from the perspectives of both the course instructors
and the clients themselves. These findings will be evaluated in the context of prior service learning literature to
identify opportunities for maximizing the benefits to client organizations without compromising student learning
outcomes.
References
 Angotti, T., Doble, C., & Horrigan, P., Eds. (2011). Service-Learning in Design and Planning: Education at
the Boundaries. Oakland, CA: New Village Press.
 Littlepage, L., & Gazley, B. (2013). “Examining Service Learning from the Perspective of Community
Organization Capacity.” In Research on Service learning: Conceptual Frameworks and Assessment.
Clayton, P., Bringle, L., & Hatcher, J., Eds. Sterling, VA: Stylus.
 Long, J.G. (2012). State of the Studio: Revisiting the Potential of Studio Pedagogy in U.S.- Based Planning
Programs. Journal of Planning Education and Research. 32 (4), pp. 431–448.
 Roakes, S.L., & Norris-Tirell, D. Community Service Learning in Planning Education: A Framework for
Course Development. Journal of Planning Education and Research. 20 (1) pp. 100-110.
 Viswanathan, L., Whitelaw, G.S., & Meligrana, J. (2012). Evaluating the Role of the Project Course in
Professional Planning Education and Its Influence on Planning Policy and Practice. Planning Practice and
Research. 27 (3), pp. 387–403.

Abstract Index #: 531
ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING EDUCATION: FROM BIOREGIONAL ANALYSIS TO LANDSCAPE PLANNING AND SITE
DESIGN
Abstract System ID#: 874
Individual Paper
LICON, Carlos [Utah State University] carlos.licon@usu.edu, presenting author, primary author

WARREN-KRETZSCHMAR, Barty [Utah State University] barty.warren@usu.edu
Environmental Planners coordinate planning efforts in a wide variety of scales and contexts. Accordingly,
environmental planning education needs strategies to create awareness and help students learn the necessary
skills to move through these arrays of scales and issues. Teaching environment planning and design processes
to support this transition should help a planning student develop professional capacity and to comprehend the
integrative multidisciplinary effort involved in the planning process.
In studio-based education, planning program need to move students learning from large-scale analysis to site
design and back. Courses and projects in environment planning should help understand how the changes in
scale, context, and focus result in different mixes of analysis, concept development, and project proposals. The
connection and explicit pedagogical approach needed to establish coordinated efforts and explicit learning
opportunities to transition through issues, scales, contexts, and system opens up multiple questions to address:
•
•
•
•
•

Where to overlap and where to separate program and courses to address specific area of interest?
How to integrate the curricula of connected professions and disciplines to establish learning
opportunities and information exchanges?
How to create awareness of process, analysis, intuition, and sensitivity?
How is the exchange of information, models, concepts, and disciplinary language handled?
What is the role of technology in blending rational processes and intuitive perceptions as we change
contexts and scales?

This presentation describes efforts connect program in bioregional planning, environment planning and
landscape architecture. At the same time, these program establish connections with other disciplines.
Sociology, ecological sciences, and applied economics are some of the many frequent collaborators with planning
and landscape architecture students. These efforts involve building bridges between colleges, disciplines, and
faculty to create collaborative multidisciplinary learning environments.
Together with current successful efforts in collaborative and multidisciplinary projects, this presentation will
share some of the challenges and problems in maintaining these connections in place. Curricula adjustments,
course load balances, thesis production and faculty research interests are among some of the challenges to build
interdisciplinary synergy.
Bioregional planning investigates the mutual interaction between regional landscape ecosystems and the human
dimension of settlements and cultural activities. environment planning as a major component in the graduate
program in landscape architecture looks into the articulation of alternative interventions to inform long term
planning considerations. These conceptual ideas are handed over to landscape architects to explore creative
interpretations of principles and values identified. Different approaches produce different outcomes, the
question is how can a student change frameworks, processes, and develop critical thinking capacities and
perspective to understand what to expect from each scale, discipline, or emphasis.
Evidence-based analysis through sound methodology helps establish valid principles to build meaningful
scenarios, which produce guiding concepts that result in applicable and implementable projects and plans. This
connection has to be clear and well established in the curriculum of environment planning and landscape
architecture. Preparing students to be aware and capable of the interdisciplinary and complex array of scales and
issues of planning for sustainable development requires models, process, and skills that can integrate knowledge
and technologies to learn and apply information and disciplines in meaningful ways.
References
 Steinitz, Carl. 2012. A Framework for Geodesign: Changing Geography by Design. Redlands, CA: ESRI.
 Steiner, Frederick R. 2008. The Living Landscape: An Ecological Approach to Landscape Planning. 2nd ed.
Washington, DC: Island Press.
 Toth, Richard E. 1988. "Theory and Language in Landscape Analysis, Planning, and Evaluation."
Landscape Ecology 1 (4):193-201.





Warren-Kretzschmar, Barty, Christina v. Haaren, Roland Hachmann, and Christian Albert. 2012. "The
Potential of GeoDesign for Linking Landscape Planning and Design." Digital Landscape Architecture 2012,
Anhalt University of Applied Sciences, Germany.
Mörtberg, U.M., B. Balfors, and W.C. Knol. 2007. "Landscape Ecological Assessment: A Tool for
Integrating Biodiversity Issues in Strategic environment Assessment and Planning." Journal of
Environmental Management 62 (4):457-470.

Abstract Index #: 532
A DIVERSITY ORIENTED PEDAGOGY: OVERCOMING PLANNER-COMMUNITY CULTURAL GAPS WITH PLANNING
EDUCATION
Abstract System ID#: 1138
Individual Paper
GARFINKEL-CASTRO, Andrea [University of Utah] andrea.garfinkel.castro@gmail.com
US demographics are changing profoundly. On track to becoming an ethnically/racially majority minority nation
by 2050, Latinos are at the forefront of this change. Demographic changes in the general population are not,
however, reflected in the ethnic/ racial demographics of planners (Dalton 2007), despite “long-standing
commitments to fairness and equity” in professional and academic planning settings (Hibbard et al. 2011, p. 3).
The growing demographic mismatch in planning suggests ideas about what constitute a livable community (and
community values) are changing in ways planning faculty and practicing planners may be unaware of, unfamiliar
with, and limited in their means to respond to.
The literature has established that a culturally relevant, place-based quality-of-life continues to remain central to
human settlements, yet varies in form and function among comminuty (Rios and Vazques 2012; Umemoto
2002). While planners and planning can play an important role in working with public and private sector
organizations and citizens in creating livable comminuty US planning culture has changed little (Sandercock
2003; Umemoto 2001), resulting in what I characterize as a socio-cultural mismatch between planners and
communities. Currently, accredited planning program are unable to provide students with the perspectives or
curricular focus of an ethnically/racially diverse faculty (Hibbard et al. 2011) as a means of bridging this cultural
mismatch. The pace of demographic change in the general population ensures this dynamic will continue and
may even worsen.
How, then, might planning schools address this socio-cultural mismatch? Arguably, an ethnically/racially diverse
faculty is a distant hope. Bridging this gap will instead more likely come from a pedagogy directed at cultural
competency, cross-cultural training, and other diversity oriented courses. This paper seeks to address the
potential for a pedagogical and curricular approach to bridging the socio-cultural gaps facing practicing planners
in light of the unprecedented demographic changes taking place in the US.
To address this potential, I begin with a literature review to examine pedagogical approaches in other academic
fields and identify key terms with which to survey program of study and curricular offerings of accredited
planning schools. Specifically, I ask: what do PAB accredited schools of planning offer in terms of curriculum for
diversity oriented courses? This is empirically answered through a survey of accredited planning schools’
programs of study (required, elective, and cross-listed courses) using text-based content analysis for specific
terms such as culture, cultural competency, and cross-cultural training. Descriptive statistics are used to identify:
what percent of these schools offer courses that address issues of cultural and demographic diversity; what
percent offer methodological diversity; what percent teach cultural competency or offer cross-cultural training.
Beyond facts, what can we learn from this research? I will examine the findings to ask how we might address
socio-demographic diversity and cultural gaps through planning pedagogy and consider variation across schools
and context, commonalities and divergence across program, the challenge of stretched faculty and
departmental resources, and problems that arise from generalizations. Nascent recommendations for increasing

diversity oriented planning curriculum are made, with an eye towards creating greater diversity and inclusivity in
PAB accredited planning schools and in the community of practicing planners.
These courses arguably do more than demonstrate a program’s commitment to addressing socio-demographic
inclusivity. They also prepare future practitioner planners to better address the values and needs of increasingly
diverse comminuty and they become a springboard for advanced dialog around issues of ethnic/racial and
cultural diversity. Furthermore, they may broaden the appeal of planning program to a more ethnically/racially
diverse student body, some of whom may even become future faculty of color, bringing full circle a virtuous cycle
of inclusivity.
References
 Dalton, L.C. 2007. Preparing planners for the breadth of practice. Journal of the American Planning
Association, 73(1), 35-48.
 Hibbard, M., Irazábal, C., Manning Thomas, J., Umemoto, K., and Wubneh, M. 2011. Diversity Task Force
Report. Association for the Collegiate Schools of Planning.
http://www.acsp.org/about/committees/committee_on_diversity
 Rios, M., and Vazquez, R. (Eds.). 2012. Diálogos: Placemaking in Latino comminuty. New York:
Routledge.
 Sandercock, L. 2003. Cosmopolis II: Mongrel city of the 21st century. New York: Continuum.
 Umemoto, K. 2001. Walking in another’s shoes: Epistemological challenges in participatory planning.
Journal of Planning Education and Research, 21, 17-30.

Abstract Index #: 533
FROM CASE STUDIES TO AUTHENTIC PROBLEMS: STRATEGIES FOR ACTIVATING THE PLANNING CLASSROOM
Abstract System ID#: 1223
Pre-organized Session: Bringing Practice to the Classroom
RONGERUDE, Jane [Iowa State University] jrong@iastate.edu
This paper asks the question, “How can planning education benefit from the use of active learning pedagogies?”
There is a growing movement within higher education to step away from the unidirectional, passive learning
format of lecture-based classes to teaching pedagogies that encourage active learning in what has been labeled
“flipped classrooms.” Team Based Learning (TBL) is an example of one such approach where students work in
heterogeneous teams for the duration of the semester and spend most of their class time working on teambased exercises where they apply the ideas they learn from readings and other preparatory materials. Case
studies, stories from practice, and authentic problems all provide valuable materials for in class activities where
students apply the course content.
This paper shares stories from the class room, It introduces the TBL approach and provides examples of how case
studies and stories from practice play an integral role in the application of this pedagogy. It reports the results
from a study at Iowa State University that investigated the connection between TBL pedagogical practices and 1)
beliefs about learning; 2) motivation to learn; and 3 professional development. The paper concludes with a
discussion about the implications for planning classrooms and planning education.
References
 Larry K. Michaelsen, Arletta Bauman Knight, L. Dee Fink (eds) 2002. Team-based Learning: A
Transformative Use of Small Groups. Praeger Publishers.
 Chuck Bonwell and Jim Eison's. 1991. Active Learning: Creating Excitement in the Classroom.
 C. Ozawa and E. Seltzer. 1999 Taking Our Bearings: Mapping a Relationship Among Planning Practice,
Theory, and Education. Journal of Planning Education and Research, vol. 18 no. 3 257-266
 John Forester, 2012. Learning to improve practice: Lessons from practice stories and practitioners' own
discourse analyses (or why only the loons show up), Journal of Planning Theory and Practice



M Centellas, GJ Love. 2012. “We're Off to Replace the Wizard”: Lessons from a Collaborative Group
Project Assignment, Political Science & Politics

Abstract Index #: 534
"FILM AND THE GLOBAL VILLAGE" A RETROSPECTIVE ON USING DOCUMENTARY FILM IN THE CLASSROOM
Abstract System ID#: 1283
Individual Paper
LOOYE, Johanna [University of Cincinnati] johanna.looye@uc.edu
Most of my students have never left the United States. Many are visual learners. All of them are preparing to
work in professional positions in an increasingly integrated global environment. My aspiration as the instructor is
to achieve two objectives: 1) to make city in developing nations “real” places to them, places they can visualize
as well as they visualize streets in Cincinnati or elsewhere in the U.S., and 2) to teach them about the dynamics
and reality of urbanization in developing countries so that they possess an analytical appreciation as well.
The practicality of this course, given the students’ general lack of exposure to city in developing countries, is
evident. Even more television exposure to foreign settings today than was the case the past, students are
generally passive viewers. Thus, the course increases exposure and familiarity as well as a critical appreciation of
the presentation and the issues.
The syllabus begins with the transition from colonialism to independence and the growth of city in Asia, Africa,
and Latin America. Other topics include low-income settlements, women’s issues, work, environment issues,
and other common issues, including planning and policy. Throughout, students simultaneously read a textbook
and view documentaries in the same week. Student assignments include: 1) a research paper on a country of
their interest, 2) a second paper on an urban issue in that country, and 3) a “video plan” (or “story board”) using
this background to produce a 30-40 minute outline of a video they would like to create. There is also a mid-term
and final examination.
The greatest challenge, having the word “Film” as the first word in the course title, is addressing the implicit
expectation of, “Oh boy! Movies!” (No real work!!). Despite this expectation, the primary skill developed in this
course is critical thinking. Primarily, this involves students using the textbook reading assignment to anticipate
what the documentary film is likely to (and ought to) present and, then, post viewing, to critique the
documentary and to assess the neutrality or bias of the film, along with discussing other issues. The focus on
classroom discussion and viewing elements reflect the movement down the “Learning Pyramid”
(thepeakperformancecenter.com) from passive to active learning; the approach also addresses the fact that
about two thirds of adults are visual learners.
Besides examining student course evaluations, comparison of mid-term and final grades over the years (including
segments that focus on text material, film material, or a combination of the two in a compare-contrast fashion)
to assess retention of material, analysis of the course will rely on paper topics students have selected, as well as a
selection of video plans. Anecdotal accounts of graduates’ emails and recommendations for future
documentaries will also be incorporated, as appropriate. The overall objective of the evaluation is to ascertain
students’ degree of knowledge of developing nations, their ability to link written to visual material, and their
ability to incorporate the different types of learning into their own creative endeavor. The challenge of evaluation
will be that there is no “control study” to serve as a base of comparison. The nature of the assessment will,
therefore, be that of a case study.
This paper’s conclusions will focus on the pedagogical challenges of 1) introducing unfamiliar places to students
as a complement to abstract learning, 2) improving reading, critical thinking, and visual literacy, and 3)
developing traditional and creative writing skills. The preliminary lesson is that this combination of materials and
approaches can be employed by other faculty members, whether to develop courses that center on or simply
incorporate documentary film for similar purposes, if not similar topics.

References
 Beall, Jo and Sean Fox. 2009. city and Development. New York, NY: Routledge.
 Facione, Peter A. 2011. “Critical Thinking: What It Is and Why It Counts.” Millbrae, CA: California
Academic Press.
 Marcus, A. S., & Stoddard, J. D. 2009. The inconvenient truth about teaching history with documentary
film: Strategies for presenting multiple perspectives and teaching controversial issues. The Social
Studies, 100(6), 279-284.
 Paul, Richard and Linda Elder. 2009. Critical Thinking Concepts and Tools. Tomales, CA: Foundation for
Critical Thinking Press.
 Rosenthal, Alan. 2007. Writing, Directing, and Producing Documentary Films and Videos. Carbondale:
Southern Illinois University Press.

Abstract Index #: 535
IMPASSES AND FAILURES IN PROJECT DEVELOPMENT: WHAT DO UNIVERSITY AND COMMUNITY PARTICIPANTS
LEARN ABOUT PLANNING?
Abstract System ID#: 1310
Individual Paper
BORNSTEIN, Lisa [McGill University] lisa.bornstein@mcgill.ca
Many planning schools engage in community-university partnerships as a means to improve student training, give
back to the wider community, and produce high-quality research. Often the presumption is that if one adopts a
good approach to community-university engagement then all three objectives can be realized (Reardon 2000;
Winkler 2013). Indeed, community-university partnerships ideally contribute to social change as well as teaching
and research. What do we learn from partnerships when they do not result in social change? Is there anything
gained from involvement in what ends up as a large-scale planning disaster?
Over the last ten years, members of a community-research alliance have worked to tame two mega-project
developments in Montreal, Quebec. Typical of many large-scale projects (Flyvbjerg 2014), the two megaprojects
have not conformed to participants’ hopes or efforts. A super-hospital is plagued with design flaws, costoverruns, poor links to public transit, and reduced health delivery capacity; popular associations are with
corruption and mismanagement. A highway interchange – to be built over the next decade – is simply not to the
liking of city residents or city government; provincial transit authorities prioritized capacity for trucking and
automobiles over environment, quality-of-life, or urban design concerns. In both cases, local residents,
students, and academic researchers had been involved in efforts – collaborative, analytic, discursive, and/or
combative – to make these projects work for their surrounding comminuty. In the views of most alliance
participants, their efforts have not met with success. Instead, the two megaprojects are prime examples of
contemporary ‘great planning disasters’.
This paper draws on the research alliance’s experiences to explore what was gained from engagement with a
seemingly unsuccessful effort to redirect these two megaprojects towards community priorities. The paper
briefly reviews (a) existing perspectives on the aims of community-university partnerships, action research, and
service learning, and (b) the development and outcomes of the two Montreal megaprojects. Discussion then
turns to positive elements of partnership around ‘unsuccessful megaprojects’. The conclusion addresses the
challenges of working with megaproject development, and theoretical and practical lessons for communityengaged planning education. Research is based on: the author's direct involvement in the alliance (public,
stakeholder, and research meetings and events); input from members of the alliance in annual reflections,
evaluation surveys, group discussions, and individual narratives; review of public records (on public consultations
and hearings, council meetings, and a corruption commission); and numerous research reports, briefing papers
and other materials produced by the alliance.

Findings are of relevance to planners, researchers and students interested in community development as well as
educators exploring community-engaged teaching. Four area of ‘learning’ are identified. Engagement with
‘failed projects’ revealed contextual and structural factors – the ‘powers at play in urban development’, in the
words of a community researcher – that can help community actors demand appropriate reform (e.g., in planning
regulations, tendering processes, and local decision-making) and better prepare for future urban projects. As a
result of drawn-out efforts to influence plans, connections and trust developed among residents, officials,
students, professors, and professionals, often across neighborhood, linguistic, income and occupational divides.
Students became attuned to community dynamics, and had the opportunity to learn both technical and soft
skills, including those of listening, dealing with conflict, and assessing the power dynamics of a situation. Finally,
there were ‘wins’ in terms of engagement: new concerns were ‘introduced into design debates around projects;
as a result, there may be longer-term shifts in the community benefits expected from megaproject
developments.
References
 Flyvbjerg, B. (2014) “What you should know about megaprojects and why: an overview,” Project
Management Journal, Vol. 45, No. 2, 6–19.
 Flyvbjerg, B., Bruzelius, N., and Rothengatter, W. (2003) Megaprojects and risk: an anatomy of ambition.
United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.
 Reardon, K. (2000) “An experiential approach to creating an effective community-university partnership:
the East St. Louis Action Research Project,” Cityscape: A Journal of Policy Development and Research
5(1): 59-74.
 Winkler, T. (2013) “At the coalface: community–university engagements and planning education,”
Journal of Planning Education and Research 33(2): 215-227.

Abstract Index #: 536
NOT YOUR MOTHER'S DOCTORAL PROGRAM ANYMORE: REINVENTING THE PHD
Abstract System ID#: 1329
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session
CHIFOS, Carla [University of Cincinnati] carla.chifos@uc.edu
KRIZEK, Kevin [University of Colorado] krizek@colorado.edu
Universities around the country are reevaluating the costs and benefits of doctoral education, and program in
planning which are usually small and and not profitable as other fields are under scrutiny. Some of the threats
include being collapsed into other program, being asked to position as more interdisciplinary with new and
fresher niches, and new expectations as to how doctoral students will be trained and educated. Planning
educators involved in doctoral program would benefit from a forum to discuss (1) the current directions of
doctoral education in our field to prepare students for the future issues and future academic situations and (2)
how program have been reinventing themselves to meet the demands of university administrators as well as to
address the future needs of the planning profession.

Track 10: Planning History
Abstract Index #: 537
WHO LIVES DOWNTOWN? PLANNING POLICY AND NEIGHBORHOOD CHANGE
Abstract System ID#: 25
Individual Paper
GRANT, Jill [Dalhousie University] jill.grant@dal.ca, presenting author, primary author
GREGORY, Will [Dalhousie University] william.p.gregory@gmail.com

In this paper we consider some of the ways that planning may have influenced who lives downtown in a smaller
city. Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada adopted its first master plan in 1945. Like many other North American city,
Halifax launched urban renewal program in the 1950s and 1960s, displacing disadvantaged residents and
transforming the urban fabric (Grant and Paterson 2012). From the 1970s on, planning policy increasingly
promoted urban intensification and mixed use. The 1990s saw new urbanism and smart growth become
influential, and the 2000s added creative city objectives (Florida 2008, Grant 2007).
We take a social and demographic history approach. In addition to reviewing planning policy and interventions
through the years we track census data from 1951 to 2011 to look at how downtown neighborhood changed
over time. The average downtown resident in 1951 was female, working class, poorly educated, earning low
wages, living in a large household, and renting an apartment. By 2011, however, conditions downtown had
changed significantly: males outnumbered females, incomes in several of the neighborhood were much higher
than the city average, many people had university degrees, and home ownership rates increased. Although some
signs of gentrification were evident by 2011, we found that some trends differed by neighborhood. We conclude
that although planning policy and public interventions enabled some changes to occur, several factors influenced
the direction and degree of neighborhood change. These included broader social and economic conditions,
interventions by major institutions (such as universities and hospitals), and local perceptions of the relative
attractiveness of major features in the city.
A great deal has been written about neighborhood change in larger city (Chen et al 2012), but less has been
written about transitions in smaller city (Prouse et al 2014). The paper will show that despite the efforts of
planners to implement policy and plans to improve living conditions downtown, signs of continuing socioeconomic polarization linger in Halifax. Instead of increasing urban densities and generating social mix, policy to
support urban intensification may have the opposite effect, as small households of urban professionals move
downtown and new clusters of people with particular social attributes develop. Practitioners can benefit from
better understanding the processes of neighborhood change and the factors that limit their ability to coordinate
development in ways that produce desired outcomes.
References
 Chen, W-H, Myles, J., and Picot, G. 2012. Why have poorer neighbourhoods stagnated economically
while the richer have flourished? Neighbourhood income inequality in Canadian city. Urban Studies
49(4): 877-896.
 Florida, R. 2008. Who’s your city? How the creative economy is making where to live the most important
decision of your life. New York: Random House.
 Grant, J.L. 2007. Chapter 3: Visions, planning and democracy. In L. Hopkins and M. Zapata, eds. Engaging
the Future: Using Forecasts, Scenarios, Plans and Projects. Cambridge: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.
pp 39-58.
 Grant, J.L. and M. Paterson. 2012. Scientific cloak / romantic heart: Gordon Stephenson and the
redevelopment study of Halifax, 1957. Town Planning Review 83(3): 319-336.
 Prouse, V., H. Ramos, JL Grant, and M. Radice. 2014. How and when scale matters: The Modifiable Areal
Unit Problem and income inequality in Halifax. Canadian Journal of Urban Research: Canadian Planning
and Policy supplement, 23(1): 61-82.

Abstract Index #: 538
THE GERMANIFICATION OF AMERICAN ZONING
Abstract System ID#: 28
Individual Paper
FISCHLER, Raphael [McGill University] raphael.fischler@mcgill.ca
Many still believe that zoning was imported to the US from Germany. It is true that American planning pioneers,
for instance those who fought for the adoption of zoning in New York City in the 1910s, referred to German

planning as a precedent that ought to be emulated. The “import” thesis was consecrated in Thomas Logan’s
classic article on “the Americanization of German Zoning” (Logan 1976). However, several historians of NorthAmerican planning (for instance, Fischler on Montréal, Toronto and New York City, and Kolnik on Los Angeles)
have documented the adoption of land-use regulations before the advent of comprehensive zoning (Fischler
2007, 2014; Kolnik 2008). They have shown that the largest North-American city had zoning codes on their
books, albeit partial ones in most cases, before New York City adopted the first comprehensive code in 1916. (The
municipality of Westmount, a suburb of Montréal, had a comprehensive zoning code seven years before New
York City did.) Despite the frequency and intensity of transatlantic exchanges, land-use regulation in North
America was largely home-grown; from the middle of the 19th century on, it grew more substantively and
geographically comprehensive.
In this paper, I build on my earlier work on the history zoning in North America, on the work of colleagues
(especially that of Sonia Hirt [2014]) and on new research on primary sources from the 1900s and 1910s. When
we broaden the focus from New York City to a larger set of North American city, the evidence shows that the
reference to Germany, which was especially important in the campaign to adopt zoning in New York City, was not
necessary from a functional perspective; i.e., German zoning was not a basis for American and Canadian zoning.
Rather, the German example was useful from a political perspective; i.e., the reference was used to try and
convince the North-American public and its elected officials that a comprehensive approach, already advocated
by Olmsted, Burnham and others, was needed and that the constraints of law and jurisprudence ought to be
lifted to make it possible. In short, the reference to German planning was a rhetorical ploy, not a practical
proposal. In reality, North-American zoning was the product of several decades of local experimentation and
innovation, and references to German efficiency served to legitimate public intervention in capitalist urban
development.
References
 Fischler, Raphaël (2014). “Émergence du zonage à Montréal, 1840 – 1914.” Les Cahiers de l’Institut du
patrimoine (“La gouvernance montréalaise: de la ville-frontière à la métropole,” eds. L. Robichaud, H.
Bérubé & D. Fyson), pp. 71-84, 2014.
 Fischler, Raphaël (2007). "Development Control in Toronto in the Nineteenth Century." Urban History
Review/Revue d’histoire urbaine, 36(1): 16-31, Fall 2007.
 Hirt, Sonia (2014). Zoned in America (Ithaca: Cornell University Press).
 Kolnick, Kathy A. (2008). “Order Before Zoning:  land_use Regulation in Los Angeles, 1880-1915.” PhD
Dissertation, University of Southern California.
 Logan, Thomas H. (1976). “The Americanization of German Zoning.” Journal of the American Institute of
Planners 42 (4): 377-385.

Abstract Index #: 539
WEAKNESS IN JAPAN'S CIVIL SOCIETY IN THE POSTWAR ERA: THE YUBARI CITY CASE STUDY
Abstract System ID#: 36
Individual Paper
MATSUI, Taotao [Rissho University, Japan] taomatsui@ris.ac.jp
In 2007, Yubari City, once the coal capital of Japan’s northernmost main island of Hokkaido, went bankrupt. By
the 2006 fiscal year, Yubari’s debt had swelled to 35.3 billion yen, amounting to eight times the city’s general
account revenue. Yubari’s bankruptcy was caused directly by the failure of the city’s economic strategy that had
been implemented since the 1970s – the promotion of the tourism industry to replace the city’s declining coal
mining. Despite the fact that tourism attractions built by Yubari City lost money from the beginning, the
municipal government continuously invested in new tourism projects. During the 30 years the Yubari City
government pursued its tourism promotion policy and accumulated huge amounts of debt, no activists or citizen
groups ever publicly questioned the mayor’s developmental policy, let alone spoke out against it. The Yubari City
case clearly shows a central feature of Japanese urban governance, that is, a weak role played by civil society in

policy formation (Sorensen 2006). This paper, through a case study of Yubari City, examines the underlying
reasons for Japan’s weak civil society.
Based on historian Sheldon Garon’s definition, “civil society” in this paper is defined to include groups that exist
in spaces between the state and the people, and offer, at least occasionally, alternatives to official discourses and
values (Garon 2003). With regard to the pattern of civil society found in Japan today, political scientist Robert
Pekkanen points out that state structuring of incentives accounts for its development (Pekkanen 2003).
Specifically, the Japanese state has structured incentives to promote small, local groups that can contribute to
stocks of social capital but that have little impact on policy making, while at the same time hinder large,
independent, professionalized groups which could change the political landscape (Pekkanen 2003). The purpose
of this paper is to test Pekkanen’s theory through a case study of Yubari City. To that end, I focus on the following
four interrelated questions: (1) What have been the central agencies’ policy on the coal mining industry in
Japan, as well as on the development of Yubari City? (2) How have big businesses affected Yubari City’s economy
and city planning? (3) What have been the planning processes of Yubari City to develop the tourism projects? (4)
What citizen groups have formed in Yubari City, and what are their major activities?
This paper employs a case study method, drawing on a long-term study of Yubari City. The analysis is based on
the following: (1) a review of tourism development project documents, and the history of national energy policy
and coal companies operated in Yubari, and (2) interviews with key persons involved in the tourism projects. The
case study of Yubari City shows that, in addition to the hostility of Yubari’s municipal government toward the
environmental citizen group based in Sapporo (the capital of Hokkaido) that made claims against Yubari’s
environmental problems, the top-down, centralized control of the national bureaucracy over municipal
governance greatly contributed to the formation of a weak civil society. In Japan in the 1960s and 70s, when the
country’s major energy source transitioned from coal to oil and most coal companies closed, the national
bureaucracy implemented policy that, on the one hand, relieved the coal companies of the financial
responsibility of the social conditions they had created in Yubari (Allen 1994), and, on the other hand, provided
Yubari with huge grants and subsidies for regeneration. Such policy intensified the habit of the municipal
government as well as of the citizens of Yubari to leave the resolution of the city’s problems to central authorities
(Maclachlan 2003). In fact, before the bankruptcy, both the municipal government and Yubari citizens firmly
believed that the state would bail out Yubari no matter how much debt the city accumulated. The dependence
on central agencies for problem resolution alleviated the citizens’ feeling of responsibility, as well as their
incentive to participate in local management.
References
 Allen, Matthew. 1994. Undermining the Japanese miracle: work and conflict in a coalmining community.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 Garon, Sheldon. 2003. From Meiji to Heisei: the state and civil society in Japan. In The state of civil
society in Japan, eds. Frank Schwartz and Susan Pharr, 42-62. New York: Cambridge University Press.
 Maclachlan, Patricia. 2003. The struggle for an independent consumer society: consumer activism and
the state’s response in postwar Japan. In The state of civil society in Japan, eds. Frank Schwartz and
Susan Pharr, 214-232. New York: Cambridge University Press.
 Pekkanen, Robert. 2003. Molding Japanese civil society: state-structured incentives and the patterning
of civil society. In The state of civil society in Japan, eds. Frank Schwartz and Susan Pharr, 116-134. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
 Sorensen, André. 2006. Centralization, urban_planning governance, and citizen participation in Japan. In
Cities, autonomy, and decentralization in Japan, eds. Carola Hein and Philippe Pelletier, 101-127. New
York: Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 540
EARLY TWENTIETH-CENTURY NEIGHBORHOOD ENTRYWAYS IN BUFFALO, NEW YORK: AN OVERVIEW OF FORM
AND FUNCTION
Abstract System ID#: 135
Individual Paper

HESS, Daniel [University at Buffalo, State University of New York] dbhess@buffalo.edu, presenting author,
primary author
IACOBUCCI, Evan [University at Buffalo, SUNY] evaniaco@buffalo.edu
During the heyday of streetcar transportation in the United States, neighborhood development took on a new
and distinct character. Expanded development opportunities related to streetcars network growth, combined
with residents’ desires to be removed from noise, pollution, and dirt of industrial-era city, encouraged growth
of “streetcar suburbs” and other exclusive neighborhood designed to offer refuge from urban ills. The ideology
of contemporaneous neighborhood development manifests itself in the physical features of the design of these
neighborhoods. One such feature that became popular in early 20th-century streetcar neighborhood was
neighborhood entryway marker. These markers typically, but not always, took the form of a set of stone or brick
towers, placed at the entrance to a residential street from an arterial roadway. Frequently, they incorporated
additional features, such as overhead archways or lamps. In this article, we explore the nature, form, and
placement of these markers, and the role they play in neighborhood identity, using a rich collection of surviving
examples in and around Buffalo, NY.
Using a combination of historical literature, field data, and spatial analysis, we investigate the history, context,
and purpose of these structures. In so doing, we explore several research questions:
•
•
•

How does the defining features and characteristics of these structures relate to neighborhood typology?
What was their effect in neighborhood life and development over time?
What role do these structures play in development of new neighborhood and/or revitalization of
historic neighborhood?

In addressing these questions, we find that, in concert with other neighborhood components, these structures
have a significant effect on the streets and neighborhood whose boundaries they delineate. Specifically, they
serve to isolate neighborhood from undesirable urban characteristics, while lending a sense of place and
neighborhood scale. They also promote connectivity by emphasizing pedestrian and vehicular interface with
surrounding area.
Preliminary findings suggest that these structures had significant effects on the neighborhood in which they
were constructed, and that these effects persist despite the multitude of changes that have taken place in
American city since their construction. This suggests that such constructions have continued relevance, and a
high potential for use, in traditional or new forms, in modern and future urban neighborhood development.
References
 National Register of Historic Places. (2005) “Multiple Resources Associated with the Suburban
Development of Buffalo, New York.” Buffalo, Erie County, New York, National Register #64500937
 National Register of Historic Places. (2010) “University Park Historic District.” Buffalo, Erie County, New
York, National Register #11000273
 Warner Jr., Sam B. (1978) The Private City: Philadelphia in Three Periods of its Growth. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press.
 Warner Jr., Sam B. (1978) Streetcar Suburbs: The Process of Growth in Boston, 1870-1900. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
 Hall, Peter. (2014). city of Tomorrow (Fourth Edition). Chichester: Wiley Blackwell.

Abstract Index #: 541
NOISE POLLUTION CONTROL - THE LOST CHORD OF  land_use PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 221
Individual Paper
SOLITARE, Laura [Texas Southern University] lgsolitare@gmail.com

Within the annals of modern city planning, city noise holds an odd place. City noise is by far the most widespread
environmental pollutant, affecting all populations. Yet, awareness of the history of noise pollution and its control
are essentially non-existent in the U.S. planner’s repertoire. Furthermore, it appears that noise abatement has all
but disappeared from the national agenda. However, as this paper will show, controlling noise was once a
leading theme in the history of  land_use planning.
For this paper, I define city noise as noise that occurs in public spaces. It can either be generated in those spaces,
such as noise created from children playing outdoors or it can travel into the ears of people occupying those
public spaces, such as noise coming in from construction or landscaping. It also includes transportation
generated noise, including airplanes, vehicle din and horns.
The paper will discuss the history of creating  land_use regulations to control city noise throughout five different
periods: 1) the progressive era (late 1800-1910s), when “anti-noise” reformers were focused on quieting the city
to make it a better place for workers and a healthier place for citizens; 2) the functional city era (late 1910s1930s), when, starting with the City Beautiful movement, noise abatement becomes a goal for most city master
plans and zoning ordinances; 3) the era of suburbanization and modern transportation (1930s-1950s), when the
rise of highway din and airport noise cause geographically widespread noise pollution; 4) the urban renewal era
(1950s-1960s), when noise is used as a factor for designating an area a “slum” under the federal urban renewal
program; and 5) the era of federal environmentism and eventual devolution (1970-present), when noise
pollution is briefly on the national agenda, but then is quickly, and ineffectively, pushed off to local governments.
This is primarily a historical research study, in which I rely on written materials including newspapers and
magazines, government reports, and planning and public health documents. For this purpose of this paper, New
York City is the main illustrative case; however, at times I use other U.S. city as examples of U.S. noise control
history. In order to explain the contemporary significance of noise pollution, I’ve conducted a literature review,
explored current news stories and government reports, and analyzed data from the American Housing Survey
and public health reports.
References
 Hall, Peter. 2014. city of Tomorrow. 4th Edition Wiley-Blackwell.
 Burnham, Daniel and Bennett, Edward. 1909. Plan of Chicago. Chicago: The Commercial Club.
 Coates, Peter A. 2005. The Strange Stillness of the Past: Toward an environment History of Sound and
Noise. environment History. 10(4)636-665.

Abstract Index #: 542
AREA REDEVELOPMENT ACT REDUX: POST-INDUSTRIALISM AND KENNEDY’S VISION
Abstract System ID#: 559
Individual Paper
MOOMAW, Suzanne [University of Virginia] swm2x@virginia.edu
Central Theme: The sustainable restructuring of depressed, post-industrial economies is a fifty-year ongoing
challenge. As early as the mid-forties, many urban area had already felt the impact of the changing economy.
The passage of the Employment Act of 1946 was intended by Congress to promote maximum employment and
production. However, little was done in the next decade to realize that goal. A breakthrough came with the
enactment into law of the Area Redevelopment Act (ARA) in 1961 after two earlier Presidential vetoes. An early
cornerstone of President John F. Kennedy’s New Frontier initiative, the Area Redevelopment Act signaled the
direct investment and complementary policy needed to address structural unemployment. At the signing in
February 1961, President Kennedy remarked, “A wise public policy uses economics to create hope—not to abet
despair.” Shepherded by Democrats, ARA called for stronger government intervention to protect and create jobs
in places with unemployment rates of six percent or more in traditional sectors such as manufacturing, mining,
and textiles. Republicans argued that the private sector, not government, was the only solution. Democrats,

however, prevailed for a short time at least. A proposed extension and funding increase of the legislation was
defeated in 1963; this is considered one of the most difficult legislative turns in the Kennedy agenda. The spatial
and sectoral disintegration of “blue-collar” work that the ARA and Jane Jacobs specifically targeted (The Economy
of city) has intensified in the intervening years and whole sectors of the economy have disappeared. This paper
explores the impact of ARA, the political barriers that prevented its continuation and expansion, and the
implications for current local, economic initiatives.
Approach and Methodology: With economic restructuring still current more than 50 years later, this paper
revisits the debate on the most effective ways to stimulate depressed economies through the lens of scale,
timeframe, and role of local partners using the experience of the ARA as a policy case study. Had the ARA been
fully funded and administered with legislative intent, would that have changed the outcomes?
Research methods will include use of original sources from the Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum
including transcripts of President Kennedy’s speeches and correspondence, interview transcripts of ARA
Administrator William Batt, Senate Banking and Commerce transcripts, and available primary data from ARA
recipient city.
Relevance: Because this legislation was short-lived, its impact and influence on subsequent program lacks the
breadth of analysis applied to its successor, Economic Development Administration. Scholars and students of
local economic theory and practice as well as economic development practitioners could benefit from an
understanding of the historical context of ARA, but more importantly, how federal investments in locales with
negative economic indicators could be more strategically placed, ways that barriers can be minimized, and the
necessary social and political infrastructure needed to support federal investments.
References
 Dr. Eran Ben-Joseph
 Dr. Nancey Green Leigh
 Dr. Sonia Hirt
 Dr. Avis Vidal
 Dr. Margaret Dewar

Abstract Index #: 543
THE EFFECTS OF INVASIONS AND WARS ON URBAN FORM: A HISTORY OF SHENYANG CITY, CHINA
Abstract System ID#: 579
Individual Paper
WANG, Huaqing [Texas A&M University] wanghuaqing@tamu.edu, presenting author, primary author
NEWMAN, Galen [Texas A&M University] gnewman@arch.tamu.edu
Shenyang, formerly the capital city of the Qing dynasty in China, has experienced a unique urban_planning and
construction process, primarily due to repeated internal and external wars throughout history. From 1898 to
2000, Shenyang experienced a multitude of invasions including attacks from Russian and Japanese countries and
internal conflicts such as the Chinese Civil War, the Warlord Era and the New China Era. These invasions and wars
have significantly influenced the transportation system, industrial structure and economic status of the city,
resulting in direct and indirect changes in the urban form of Shenyang. The city with now has two urban core
areas and is characterized by and a collage of styles including Chinese organic and grid forms, European Baroque
axes and terminal points, and Japanese ‘ting’ and rhombus forms. The rhombus form appeared in the old
Commercial Port area in Shenyang to connect the Imperial Palace and historical South Manchuria Railway Zone
areas.
In an effort to untangle this rich spatial tapestry, this paper reviews invasions in Shenyang’s history and links their
effects on factors of social equity such as urban construction, street networks change, accessibility and locational
difference. These variables are analyzed using 10 historical maps from 1898-1996 through Space Syntax software,

which identifies fundamental links between spatial layout and the social, economic and environment
performance of a place. The study assesses differences through both time series analyses and single time period
district comparisons.
In 1898-1903, during the Russian invasion period, the South Manchuria Railway was constructed. After the
Japanese took over in 1905, they planned constructed the South Manchuria Railway Zone. This Zone is
characterized by the traditional Japanese ‘ting’ form as well as European Baroque elements which, at that time,
were popular in Japan. In 1906, under the requirements of several western consortiums, the Chinese
government, in partnership with Japanese colonists, constructed the first horse-drawn rail car line. This
strengthened the link between the Imperial Palace area and historical South Manchuria Railway Zone. Between
1916 and 1931, the Warlord Zhang Zuolin controlled the urban development of Shenyang. Within this time, the
Commercial Port area in Shenyang was established. This is historical zone urban Shenyang allowed foreigners to
build houses, rent land and conduct business.
The area between the Imperial Palace and the historical South Manchuria Railway Zone eased the contact
between political and military populations. Planning in this area did not simply mimic the form of the South
Manchuria Railway Zone, but explored a way to best connect the Shenyang old city with the Railway Zone while
maximizing the integrity of the land. Also, the South Market design in the commercial port area followed the
traditional Chinese Eight Trigrams ideology, which came from the famous philosophical book ‘I Ching.’ Around
1920, Zhang developed several industrial districts in Shenyang. The forms of these industrial districts all differ.
Some follow European styles and many were self-developed without a clear pattern. All the forms discussed
above still can be seen in Shenyang today, despite large locational and accessibility differences. Internal and
external strife led to a dueling urban system with split populations, resulting in separate central business districts
between cultures. Historical events. Such as wars and strife, can significantly influence urban form and due to
social equity lapses. policy to balance these issues and smarter design/planning can assist.
References
 Nishimura, Hirokazu, and Susumu Kuroda. A Lost Mathematician, Takeo Nakasawa: The Forgotten Father
of Matroid Theory. Springer Science & Business Media, 2009.
 Wang, Lianjie. Zhongdong Railway Incident and Great Repercussions Caused by Letters from Chen Duxiu.
Asian Culture and History 2, no. 1 (2010): p48.
 LIMA, J. Compensatory Urban Form. In Proceedings of the Third International Space Syntax Symposium,
2001.
 Zhang, Hongjun. Japan and Zhongdong Railway Incident. Asian Culture and History 1, no. 2 (2009): p57.
 Camagni, Roberto, Maria Cristina Gibelli, and Paolo Rigamonti. Urban Mobility and Urban Form: The
Social and environment Costs of Different Patterns of Urban Expansion. Ecological Economics 40, no. 2
(February 2002): 199–216.

Abstract Index #: 544
FREEDOM ROADS: THE ROLE OF THE ROAD IN THE FIGHT FOR SOCIAL JUSTICE
Abstract System ID#: 656
Individual Paper
SAMUELS, Linda [University of Arizona] lcsamuels@email.arizona.edu
“The constitution guarantees that a citizen or group of citizens may assemble and petition their government for
redress of their grievances even by mass demonstration . . . and such rights may also be exercised by marching,
even along public highways . . .”
-‘Williams vs. Wallace’, class action suit against Governor George Wallace and the State of Alabama for the right
to march from Selma to Montgomery, March 17, 1965
Though the first, fourteenth, and fifteenth amendments to the US Constitution establishing free speech and
redress of grievances, citizenship, and the right to vote respectively had been ratified nearly a century before, the

1960’s in the American south were a time still of institutionalized inequalities. While over 50% of the votingeligible citizens of Dallas County, Alabama were black in 1961, less than 2.2% of those 15,115 people were
registered to vote compared to 66.8% of their white counterparts. In Wilcox County, where blacks outnumbered
whites 3 to 1, not one single black citizen was registered whereas 100% of the county’s 2,647 whites had filed
successful voter registration applications. Public toilets, hotels, and restaurants were still segregated under Jim
Crow laws, which legalized the so-called ‘separate but equal’ strategy by devising a discriminatory system of
barriers, prioritization, and intimidation. In Montgomery, Alabama of the late 1950’s a black woman was required
by law to surrender her seat on a public bus for a white passenger of either sex. The civil rights activists of this era
foresaw the enormity of the task that lay before them, combating generations of unchecked power and a sense
of entitlement and ego born from decades of oppression. Strategically, the campaign attacked the larger issue
through the smaller, humanist questions of individual rights and responsibilities – the right to eat lunch in a
public facility, to wait for a bus in comfort, and – the most basic to democracy – the right to vote. The question of
‘public’ was vital in this debate – who is included in the definition of the American public? Who in fact qualifies
under the guise of law as a legitimate citizen? And, in light of that inclusion, where and how is that public made
present? On December 5, 1955 when Rosa Parks, an unknown black seamstress, refused to give up her seat for a
white man who had boarded a Montgomery public bus after her, she and the entire movement enlisted the
entanglement of constitutional law and transportation infrastructure as an ally in the redefinition of human
value. Three linked events brought the role of the road into the twentieth century debate for civil rights: the
Montgomery bus boycott of 1955 and 1956; the Freedom Riders and their interpretation of the Interstate
Commerce Clause; and the attempted and then actual 54 mile march from Selma to Montgomery on US-80. This
paper looks at the latter of those events, particularly focused on the legal and theoretical transformation of US80 over the three attempted marches into federal-level contested civic space, and the way those contestations
may be utilized to more equitably consider infrastructure’s role as an active part of the public realm.
References
 Williams vs. Wallace. Civ. A. No. 2181-N. (U.S. District Court, M.D. Alabama N. D., 1965), Appendix A.

Abstract Index #: 545
EXPRESS ROUTE TO ECONOMIC DEGENERATION: URBAN RENEWAL ON BUFFALO'S EAST SIDE
Abstract System ID#: 671
Individual Paper
OLSON, Katelin [Cornell University] keo24@cornell.edu
In Buffalo and throughout the United States, the 1960s ushered in two paradoxical experiences for urban
residents, particularly African Americans: the expansion of civil rights and the progressive physical constriction of
their neighborhood through urban renewal activities. A short drive down Buffalo’s once-bustling Broadway
bespeaks of a historic commercial corridor pock-marked by vacancies and neglect. The physical signs of
disinvestment cascade: boarded up doors, tattered curtains fluttering in broken windows, empty lots, litter.
Abstract indicators---crime statistics, economic investment figures, graduation rates---all speak to a
neighborhood, Buffalo’s largest, that has been routinely neglected by both public and private entities. As other
portions of the city enjoy an economic revival, the East Side remains locked out of such improvements.
Rewind the clock six decades. Women in dresses and gloves, men in suits and hats walk down the street,
packages in tow. Doors open and close at bakeries, shoe stores, meat markets and tailors. Children wait
(impatiently) outside; impromptu games commence. Lines of cars converge at intersections, and church marques
announce weekly services. This was the East Side of Buffalo in the 1950s, ironically bemoaned by planners for
being too congested. Can we pinpoint the moment the vibrancy of the neighborhood began to dim? I argue that
the demolition of the Humboldt Parkway (1958), designed by Frederick Law Olmsted and one of the city’s most
picturesque greenways, for the six-lane Kensington Expressway (1961-1965) was a catastrophic planning
decision, effectively barricading the East Side’s increasingly African American population from the rest of the city.

The history and impact of the devastation wrought by urban renewal in American city is well-trod academic
ground, but Buffalo has been largely under-explored from this angle. Historians such as Thomas Sugrue (2014),
Robert Fogelson (2003), and Douglas Rae (2001) have all studied the role of industrial relocation, suburban
developments, and racial tensions in effecting settlement patterns and the establishment of the current innercity crisis. Scholars of the built and natural environments, such as Michael Tomlan (2014) and Robert Gioielli
(2014), have focused on the impact of physical surroundings on comminuty and how their degradation fueled
activism beginning in the mid-20th century. Despite much excellent work on these themes, such perspectives
have not adequately addressed how Buffalo was impacted by urban renewal activities, or how city planners
responded to further neighborhood decline through subsequent 1970s planning initiatives. The challenges of
Buffalo’s East Side are reflected in city throughout the United States, and without an understanding of the
urban_planning historical record, we are left with an incomplete analysis that precludes developing new
revitalization schemes based on well-grounded assessments.
To address this substantive gap in the literature, my paper addresses the issue of urban renewal decisions on
Buffalo’s East Side with special attention to follow-up mitigation and revitalization efforts by planning officials in
subsequent decades. I will examine a variety of materials, including adopted municipal planning documents,
transportation plans, neighborhood outreach efforts, U.S. Census records, maps, photographs, and oral histories.
As part of a larger dissertation project on the East Side, I will explore the physical, economic and social  impact of
the demolition of the Humboldt Parkway, the construction of the Kensington Expressway, the reorientation of
neighborhood resources, and successive public and private initiatives to readdress the adverse effects of
transportation reconfigurations. I will use these findings in juxtaposition with contemporary revitalization ideas
regarding the removal of the Kensington Expressway and the reintroduction of a modern version of the
Humboldt Parkway in order to evaluate the feasibility of the reintegration of the East Side into Buffalo’s urban
fabric.
References
 Fogelson, R. M. (2001). Downtown: its rise and fall, 1880-1950. New Haven: Yale University Press.
 Gioielli, R. (2014). environment activism and the urban crisis: Baltimore, St. Louis, Chicago.
Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
 Rae, D. W. (2003). City: urbanism and its end. New Haven: Yale University Press.
 Sugrue, T. J. (2014). Origins of the urban crisis: race and inequality in postwar Detroit. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
 Tomlan, M. A. (2014). Historic Preservation: Caring for Our Expanding Legacy. New York: Springer.

Abstract Index #: 546
BRINGING HISTORIC PRESERVATION INTO PLANNING HISTORY: NARRATIVES OF URBAN CHANGE AND THE
INDUSTRIAL LANDSCAPE OF HOLYOKE, MASSACHUSETTS IN THE 1970S
Abstract System ID#: 767
Individual Paper
MOGA, Steven [Smith College] smoga@smith.edu
In 2006, writing in the Journal of Planning History, urbanist and historian Joseph Heathcott argued that “it is
vitally important that historians of city planning, architecture, and design begin to incorporate historic
preservation into broader narratives of urban change.” This paper responds to Heathcott’s challenge, examining
the recent history of the planned industrial city of Holyoke, Massachusetts. It will contribute to planning history
scholarship by bringing attention to debates about the meaning, uses, and interpretation of the Paper City’s
historic urban form in relation to planning, specifically in the area of economic development,  land_use, and
zoning. The analysis focuses on the 1970s as a critical period of urban change and political debate, examining
how local actors constructed narratives about the urban landscape and imagined the city’s future. A central
theme in the analysis is how historic preservation emerged as an alternative approach to modern methods of
physical planning and development, following the adoption of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 and
the establishment of the Holyoke Historical Commission in 1972.

Historic surveys and planning studies, designations to the National Register of Historic Places, and local history
and heritage events connected to the city centennial (1973) and national bicentennial (1976) contributed to a
high degree of historical awareness during this period. Districts listed on the National Register include the Hadley
Falls Company Housing District (1972), Wistariahurst (1973), and the Holyoke Canal System (1980). Furthermore,
between 1978 and 1983, the state legislature provided authorization and funding for Holyoke as one of eight
Heritage State Parks in the Commonwealth, leading to the construction of a visitor center and museum in the
downtown area adjacent to the city’s canal district.
This study will build upon the integrated approach to planning and preservation history established by Michael
Holleran in his 1998 book Boston’s “Changeful Times”: Origins of Preservation and Planning in America. Using a
case study method, this paper examines modern preservation and planning in the context of urban renewal and
deindustrialization. It also confronts the tricky interrelationships as well as revitalization potential of
intergovernmental funding, relations, and control, looking at how planning processes involved local, state, and
federal actors.
Methods and sources include a review of planning reports, government documents, historic preservation survey
and documentation forms, and maps; analysis of newspaper articles, particularly the reporting of debates over
job creation strategies, industrial retention, and urban renewal; and, interviews with current planners,
preservationists, and citizens.
References
 Birch, Eugenie L. and Douglas Roby. “The Planner and the Preservationist: An Uneasy Alliance,” Journal
of the American Planning Association, vol. 50, no. 2 (1984): 194-207.
 Heathcott, Joseph. “Curating the City: Challenges for Historic Preservation in the Twenty-First Century,”
review essay, Journal of Planning History, vol. 5. no. 1 (February 2006): 75-83.
 Holleran, Michael. Boston’s “Changeful Times”: Origins of Preservation and Planning in America.
Baltimore and London: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998.
 Listokin, David, Barbara Listokin, and Michael Lahr. “The Contributions of Historic Preservation to
Housing and Economic Development,” Housing Policy Debate, vol. 9, no. 3 (1998): 431-78.
 Ryberg-Webster, Stephanie and Kelly L. Kinahan. “Historic Preservation and Urban Revitalization in the
Twenty-First Century,” Journal of Planning Literature, vol. 29, no. 2 (2014): 119-139.

Abstract Index #: 547
FROM THE COLD WAR TO THE WARMED GLOBE: NUCLEAR CIVIL DEFENSE, CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION,
AND THE OPPORTUNISM OF PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 863
Individual Paper
LAMB, Zachary [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] zlamb@mit.edu, presenting author, primary author
VALE, Lawrence [MIT] ljvale@mit.edu
In the last 70 years, two fundamental problems have threatened the very survival of the planet: nuclear war and
climate change. In each case, planners have sought to use the urgency of these problems as a lever to propose
sweeping reforms, often using a new rationale to re-package earlier ideas. This paper analyzes how midtwentieth century planning discourses on nuclear civil defense might relate to and inform our understanding of
contemporary conversations relating to urban climate change adaptation. For their respective generations of
planners and urbanists, each of these threats have been regarded as necessitating fundamental shifts in the
spatial, political, and economic structure of city. This exploratory paper assesses how planners, designers, and
allied disciplines have characterized the threats associated with these two phenomena. We consider the
remedies proposed (spatial as well as political, economic, and social) to cope with these emerging threats and
assess how they relate to pre-existing trends in planning and design. Lastly, we explore how analysis of the
previous cycle of nuclear threat-driven urbanism—examining how proposals for decentralization were both

enacted and rejected — might help us understand the emerging directions in urban climate change discourse.
Drawing on close reading of theoretical writings and planning proposals from leading mid-century urbanists such
as Ludwig Hilbersimer and Lewis Mumford, as well as on proposals debated in the Bulletin of the Atomic
Scientists during the 1950s, we attempt to sort out the extent to which planning proposals opportunistically used
the Cold War nuclear threat to advance earlier ideas that had failed to gain acceptance.
Written just one month after the first atomic bombs were dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Ludwig
Hilberseimer’s introduction to The New Regional Pattern, predicted that “The atomic age which we are now
entering with its changing forces, will, however inevitably change the problems of planning”(Hilberseimer 1949).
Hilberseimer and many other urbanists viewed the advent of the nuclear age as cause for fundamentally
reshaping the form and structure of city. The bomb served as a muse and a motivator for urban thinkers across
the spectrum from the high-Modernist Hilberseimer to the garden city regionalism advocated by Mumford.
Although their previous decades-long pre-War appeals for planning reform on aesthetic, moral, and efficiency
grounds had not been effective in overcoming entrenched political and economic interests, these thinkers saw
the existential threat of nuclear destruction as something of a planning trump card. They hoped that with this
new dreadful potential on the horizon, the balance of competing urban interests would finally be shifted in their
favor.
Echoing the sentiments of their nuclear-age forebears, advocates of urban climate change adaptation proclaim,
“this changes everything” (Klein 2014). Planners, designers, and allied scholars have put forth a range of
proposals in response to these mounting risks, ranging from building and neighborhood-scale efforts to promote
“resilience” to broader calls for the “transformation” of spatially-embedded social, political, and economic
patterns to address the “root causes” of urban vulnerability (Pelling 2010). However, based on the analysis of
nuclear-era planning, we ask: To what degree does climate change adaptation “change everything” for planners
and to what degree does it provide a new rationale and a new rhetoric for pre-existing projects? If the planning
responses to the threat of nuclear war were largely rooted in pre-Manhattan Project visions for urban reform,
how do the responses to this new complex of urban climate change risks relate to previously existing projects in
planning, from ecological design to anti-capitalist social inclusion to Global City mega-projects?
References
 Mumford, Lewis. The City in History: Its Origins, Its Transformations, and Its Prospects. New York:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1961.
 Hilberseimer, Ludwig. New Regional Pattern Industries & Garden. Paul Theobald, 1949.
 Pelling, Mark. Adaptation to Climate Change: From Resilience to Transformation. Routledge, 2010.
 Klein, Naomi. This Changes Everything: Capitalism vs. The Climate. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2014.
 Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, especially 1950-1952.

Abstract Index #: 548
LUCKNOW: IN SEARCH OF AN URBAN IDENTITY
Abstract System ID#: 944
Individual Paper
KRISHNA, Ashima [University at Buffalo, SUNY] ashimakr@buffalo.edu
The evolution of urban landscapes in Indian city is a unique and often iterative process, largely dependent on
political and social conditions prevalent at the time. India’s particularly complex history, especially through the
medieval period, also ensured that geography played a role in the development of urban landscapes.
Consequently, northern, southern, eastern and western Indian city have distinct identities and patterns
resulting from very particular geo-political conditions. As a result there is very little conformity and overlap
between urban landscapes in India---form and spatial configurations can vary from being wholly Hindu, Islamic,
Dutch Colonial, British Colonial, Portuguese Colonial in influence, to being permutations of two or more. Each of
these influences in turn have temporal implications in shaping urban landscapes in city, giving rise to
contemporary challenges and conflicts between urban development and the need to preserve urban landscapes.

This paper examines the development of one such Indian city, Lucknow, and illustrates how diverse trends and
influences over time have resulted in a dense and rich urban landscape that is today struggling for an identity and
a sense of heritage.
Lucknow has had a host of influences in the several centuries of its existence, with the most notable development
occurring during the city’s Nawabi phase. The city’s urban landscape underwent a significant transformation after
the advent of the British, first through the East India Company, and then through the Crown. Conscious acts of
planning, however, only began at the turn of the twentieth century, a time when Ebenezer Howard’s ideas for
ideal city form were already being implemented. The often-ignored city of Lucknow, in northern India, benefited
from Howard’s influence on planners like Patrick Geddes and James Linton Bogle, who, each in their own way
attempted to turn Lucknow into a city of gardens. In the 1940’s, American architect Albert Mayer, in his role as
the Planning & Development Adviser to the Government of Uttar Pradesh of a newly-independent India, was
instrumental in shaping how the city was planned. The aftermath of Independence also brought one of the
largest displacement of people in modern history, when India was partitioned to create Pakistan. Hundreds of
thousands of refugees flooded into the city, further shaping planning strategies, initiatives and policy for the
next few years. In the new millennium, the city has once again transformed into the ‘city of gardens’ that it was
thought to be a century ago. Large-scale construction of parks and gardens in the peripheral area of the core
city, primarily motivated by politics, have propelled the city into a new era of its development and identity.
In order to highlight the city’s transformation into an eclectic mix of spatial patterns both old and new, I will trace
over three centuries of the city’s development: from its earliest origins to the influence of the Nawabs, from the
early twentieth century improvement schemes, to a sudden need for residential comminuty postIndependence, to its present-day role as a city of gardens and parks. These multi-layered patterns have been
overlaid on a historic urban fabric that makes the city unique, and hence ideal for a host of initiatives to preserve
the historic urban landscape. The rich tapestry of influences, however, also cause conflict in whose heritage
needs to be preserved, and who has the right to that heritage. Pre-twentieth century layers comprise the original
indigenous settlement, overlaid with Islamic-era landscapes, overlaid with British efforts of demolition,
reconstruction and control. It was only at the turn of the twentieth century that the city of Lucknow began to be
‘planned’. But was Lucknow ever really wholly planned and what does that mean for its urban heritage?
References
 Geddes, Patrick. 1916. Town Planning in Lucknow: A Report to the Municipal Council. Lucknow: Murray’s
London printing Press.
 Geddes, Patrick. 1900. Report on Planning for the Lucknow Zoological Garden. Lucknow [India]: N.K.
Press.
 Thorner, Alice. 1981. “Nehru, Albert Mayer, and Origins of Community Projects.” Economic and Political
Weekly 16 (4): 117–120. http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/4369464.
 Singh, A.K., and S. A. Jafri. 2011. “Lucknow: From Tradition to Modernity.” History and Sociology of
South Asia 5 (2) (June 6): 143–164. doi:10.1177/223080751100500204.
http://hsa.sagepub.com/content/5/2/143.short.
 Government of Uttar Pradesh. 1950. “Relief & Rehabilitation Department File no.557.” Lucknow (India):
Uttar Pradesh State Archives.

Abstract Index #: 549
THE DISCREET NUISANCE: THE SHORT, UNHAPPY LIFE OF THE OPIUM DEN LAWS, 1875-1889
Abstract System ID#: 954
Individual Paper
THACHER, David [University of Michigan] dthacher@umich.edu
America’s first drug laws were  land_use laws, and their history tells us something important about the evolution
of our ideas about the regulation of the urban environment in the late 19th century. Since colonial times the
common law classified unseemly  land_uses like rowdy saloons and brothels as “disorderly houses” and subjected

their owners and denizens to criminal punishment. Through most of the 19th century, however, the “disorderly”
label only applied if a  land_use actually disturbed its neighbors. For example, courts regularly rejected disorderly
house cases brought against rural brothels and saloons located far from population centers, as well as discreet
"houses of ill fame" that conducted their business in a way that did not attract their neighbors’ attention.
When Chinese immigrants began to open opium dens in Western mining towns in the 1870s and early 1880s,
local, state, and territorial governments initially tried to regulate them by amending their longstanding disorderly
house laws. These opium den laws represented the first drug laws in American history: The sale and use of
opium, cocaine, and other drugs remained entirely legal, but growing public concerns about opium smoking led
dozens of city councils and state and territorial legislatures to make it a crime to operate or visit a house where
opium was sold and used on the premises. These new laws reflected an uneasy compromise between anti-vice
activists and the anti-Chinese movement, on the one hand, and those concerned about government overreach
into the private sphere, on the other. (Courts and legislatures often explicitly exempted opium use in one’s own
private home from the reach of these laws, recognizing the precedent such a ban would have for the regulation
of alcohol.)
Although legislators throughout the mining West tried to define them as just another species of nuisance
property, opium dens were not neighborhood nuisances in any familiar sense. While drunkards often became
rowdy and enraged, most opium users became introspective and lethargic. Informed accounts uniformly describe
opium dens as quiet and civilized places, where a strict code of conduct ensured that fights were rare and quiet
almost always reigned. Once opium dens had proven that they were not incorrigible nuisances to the surrounding
neighborhood, they would presumably disqualify themselves for treatment as disorderly houses in the traditional
sense of the term.
Even for its traditional targets, however, disorderly house doctrine had already begun to degenerate by the third
quarter of the 19th century, in the sense that a house might be found “disorderly” even though the activities that
took place inside it affected no one on the outside at all. Where the common law idea of “nuisance” that
underpinned disorderly house doctrine had once been limited to the tangible intrusion of sight, sound, and smell
onto neighboring properties, by the 1870s it encompassed purely moral nuisances. This new concept of nuisance,
I argue, reflected anxiety about the corrupting potential of the cosmopolitan urban environment, and particularly
its racial diversity.
By shedding light on the transformation of central concepts in nuisance doctrine on the eve of the revolution in
American  land_use law that took place in the early 20th century, I hope to call attention to the contingency of the
ideas that actually informed that revolution. In that way I hope to help lay the foundations for a deeper
understanding of the historical roots of American  land_use control, as well as other aspects of legal control of the
urban environment.
References
 William Novak. The People's Welfare: Law and Regulation in Nineteenth-Century America (University of
North Carolina Press.)
 David Courtwright. Dark Paradise: A History of Opium Addiction in America (Harvard University Press)
 Robert Bone. "Normative Theory and Legal Doctrine in American Nuisance Law: 1850 to 1920."
University of Southern California Law Review
 William Fischel. "An economic history of zoning and a cure for its exclusionary effects." Urban Studies
 Emily Talen. "Zoning and Diversity in Historical Perspective." Journal of Planning History

Abstract Index #: 550
PLANNING HISTORY, INSTITUTIONS, AND THE COMPARATIVE PROJECT
Abstract System ID#: 1018
Individual Paper
SORENSEN, Andre [University of Toronto] sorensen@utsc.utoronto.ca

This paper develops a theoretical framework for an institutional approach to comparative planning history
research. I start with the limiting assumption that a primary challenge of planning in capitalist system is to
develop effective strategies for managing land and property development, and equitably distribute the costs and
benefits of delivering infrastructure and services within bounded territories. I draw on the ‘Varieties of
Capitalism’ (VOC) thesis, which finds both significant diversity and continuity of different national capitalisms in
the face of global economic integration (Hollingsworth and Boyer 1997, Hall and Soskice 2001, Streeck and
Yamamura 2001, Yamamura and Streeck 2003). VOC encompasses a broad research agenda that examines and
seeks to explain differences in the institutional configurations of capitalist system in different countries. I
suggest that such a comparative institutional approach will be valuable in planning history studies.
Following the work of North (1990) on the role of institutions and economic performance, a key claim of VOC
analysis is that the institutional infrastructure of national economic and governance system can provide
important comparative advantages for firms, that influence overall economic performance, and that sets of such
institutional infrastructure are self-reinforcing and hard to change, because changes in one institution will be
difficult or ineffectual without reform of other linked institutions (Evans 1995, Streeck 1997). This framework is
applied to urban_planning and governance institutions relevant to land and property development. It is argued
that functional interdependence among multiple institutions is a powerful factor that reinforces path
dependence, so the different varieties of capitalism will be unlikely to converge on a common model (Hall and
Soskice 2001). Analysis of path dependent urban institutions suggests that such convergence may be very slow or
nonexistent. I have argued than an institutional approach to planning history promises important insights for
comparative analysis of planning institutions (Sorensen 2015). This paper develops this approach with a
theoretical and comparative approach to the analysis of institutional development and change within planning
governance.
References
 Hall, P. A. and D. W. Soskice (2001). Varieties of capitalism: the institutional foundations of comparative
advantage. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
 Hollingsworth, J. R. and R. Boyer (1997). Contemporary capitalism: the embeddedness of institutions.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
 Sorensen, A. (2015). "Taking Path Dependence Seriously: An historical institutionalist research agenda in
planning history." Planning Perspectives 30(1): 17-38.
 Evans, P. B. (1995). Embedded autonomy: states and industrial transformation. Princeton, N.J., Princeton
University Press.
 Streeck, W. and K. Yamamura (2001). The origins of nonliberal capitalism: Germany and Japan in
comparison. Ithaca, Cornell University Press.

Abstract Index #: 551
RECONCEPTUALIZAING COMMEMORATION: DISSOLVING CULTURAL BOUNDARIES IN A POST-MODERN WORLD
Abstract System ID#: 1112
Individual Paper
SLOANE, David [University of Southern California] dsloane@price.usc.edu
After World War II, planners and civic leaders called for “living memorials” such as the dedication of an
auditorium, public plaza or highway rather than the traditional war memorial (Shanken 2002). Their argument
was that living memorials were a better use of the public’s money, creating what we would call today, a liveable
city. They also believed that such memorials better reflected contemporary attitudes towards memorialization,
which placed the dead firmly outside the routine life of the city.
Their attitudes toward war memorials reflected a broader cultural separation of the living from the dead.
Twentieth century Americans witnessed the placement of the dying in hospitals, the deceased in the funeral
home, and memories in the private home and the cemetery (Sloane 1991). Death, which had played previously a

central role in Americans’ lives, was re-conceptualized as a social taboo, with trips to the cemetery avoided and
the sick and dying discussed in awkward terms (Mitford 1963). Much as Euclidian zoning separated and
segregated uses, the cultural avoidance of death ensured the dead would be sheltered in increasingly
disconnected spaces.
This paper examines how, since the 1970s, these sharp boundaries have begun to dissolve. The most visible
symbol of this dissolution is the success of large public memorials such as Maya Lin’s controversial Vietnam
Veterans Memorial, but the change is a broader shift in our attitudes toward the dying and the dead, resulting in
the re-emergence of home death (much like the home birth) and the reconsideration of the cemetery as the sole
place for memories. Americans, especially younger residents, are demanding immediate, personal, non-mediated
public memorials for those killed, for example, in car/bicycle accidents and wars. The most recognized of these
new memorials is the roadside shrine, but they also include lesser variations such as the ghost bike, car/truck
vinyl decal, and memorial (tattoo) ink. Commemoration has been personalized, and the personal has become
more public.
The paper will consider the design and content of these new spaces using archival sources, analysis of newspaper
and other public media, and individual observations. It will discuss how they are both innovative (using new
technologies in altered spaces) and nostalgic (retaining old tropes and reusing familiar icons) in their content and
architecture.
This cultural shift has potentially profound implications for planning. The public nature of the memorials, and
their location in both liminal and illegal spaces, raises issues of how we regulate memory in society. Their
presence in public spaces intrudes on conventional, modern conceptions of what is appropriate there. Roadside
shrines and ghost bikes especially confound transportation planners, who often dismiss them as mobility
distractions -- even as younger generations view them as enriching urban landscapes and educating passers-by.
Coutts et al (2011) and other planning academics have renewed the study of the cemetery as a  land_use. This
study explores the topic from a related but different perspective, moving from an analysis of land scarcity to one
of cultural change. The research hopefully will contribute to emerging literatures on informal uses of space in the
city, changing conceptions of  land_use regulation, and evolving understandings of the use of public space in the
city.
References
 Coutts, Christopher, Basmajian, Carlton, and Chapin, Timothy. 2011. Projecting Landscapes of Death.
Landscape and urban_planning 102/4: 254-261.
 Mitford, Jessica. 1963. The American Way of Death. New York: Simon & Schuster.
 Shanken, Andrew M. 2002. Planning Memory: Living Memorials in the United during World War II. The
Art Bulletin 84/1: 130-147.
 Sloane, David Charles. 1991. The Last Great Necessity: Cemeteries in American History. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press.
 Mukhija, Vinit, and Loukaitou-Sideris, Anastasia. 2014. The Informal American City: Beyond Taco Trucks
and Day Labor. Cambridge, MA: MITA Press.

Abstract Index #: 552
HOW city BECOME “PROGRESSIVE”? A TRI-CITY CASE STUDY
Abstract System ID#: 1145
Individual Paper
RAHMAN, Shahin [University of Hawaii at Manoa] shahinur@hawaii.edu
There has been a renewed interest on the idea and genesis of the “progressive city” (Goldberg, 2014; Clavel,
2013; Schragger 2009, 2013) since the first seminal work on this issue by Clavel (1986). In his first seminal work
on the “progressive city,” Clavel (1986) explored five smaller American city i.e. Hartford, Cleveland, Santa

Monica, Berkeley, and Burlington to understand how redistributive and participatory reforms push the city
towards “progressive” direction. This current research explores three American city i.e. Portland, OR; Austin,
TX; and Madison, WI and their history from 1900 to present time to further understand the genesis of the
“progressive city.” I divide the time in three distinct phases for the sake of brevity. The first phase deals the
history of each of city from 1900 to the Second World War. The second phase constitutes the post Second World
War period that ends in 1980 and finally, the last phase explores with the contemporary history from 1980 to
current time.
This research conceptualize “progressive city” as one that is defined in two ways: (a) by processes of inclusive and
participatory governance; and (b) by the outcomes it achieves in terms of social justice. On both counts the
“progressive city” is understood to be a public city with a broad public sphere with an active civil society and its
representative organizations, along with government and the private sector. I use this conceptual framework to
explore one main research question: how city become “progressive.” In another words, the overarching inquiry
of this research is to investigate the anatomy and drivers of the “progressive city” by using a tri-city case study. I
use archival and historical document analysis method to conduct this research. I analyze among other
documents- the municipal legislation, city general plans, and newspaper articles to investigate the genesis and
drivers of the “progressive city.” I also conducted semi-structured interviews with the city mayors, council
members, planners, residents, activist groups, civil societies and grass root organizations to understand the
recent development and history of the city.
Preliminary findings of this research show promising results in all three city in demonstrating the legacy of the
history of planning and policy making in municipal level. As for example, Portland has very unique Urban Growth
Boundary (UGB) that was passed in 1973 to manage the growth of the city. However, at its core UGB has clearly
demonstrated how collective rights and imaginers can be achieved over individual property rights. In Austin, the
city controls and runs the Public Utility Company i.e. Austin Energy. During the last several years more than $100
million profit was transferred from Austin Energy to the city general fund to provide, “vital city services such as
police, fire, EMS, parks and libraries.” At the same time, public ownership of the utility company has kept the
energy price in check for the city residents and businesses compare to the surrounding suburbs. Finally, Madison
a city of less than a quarter million people has more 120 neighborhood associations. These grass root
neighborhood associations have been playing vital role in participatory planning processes. Even though the
nature and content of these three examples vary widely, but all of them lie at the core for the “progressive city”
formation. Each of the examples shows how different planning and policy are making these city “progressive.”
This research is very relevant because it shows how “progressive city” take their form and shape over the
course of time and how other city can learn from these case studies.
References
 Clavel, P. (1986). The Progressive City: Planning and Participation, 1969-1984. New Brunswick, NJ:
Rutgers University Press.
 Clavel, P. (2013). The “Progressive City” Over Time. A paper presented in the 15th National Conference
on Planning History, October 3-6, 2013, Toronoto, CA.
 Goldberg, M. (2014). The Rise of the Progressive City. The Nation, 21 April 2014.
 Schragger, R.C. (2009). The Progressive City. Virginia Public Law and Legal Theory Research Paper No.
2009-16 presented at The Eleventh Annual Liman Public Interest Colloquium, 2010.
 Schragger, R.C. (2013). Is a Progressive City Possible? Reviving Urban Liberalism forthe Twenty-First
Century. Harvard Law & Policy Review, 7, 231-252

Abstract Index #: 553
THE NEXT URBAN SUCCESS STORY: SEARCHING FOR EXPLANATORY TOOLS
Abstract System ID#: 1198
Individual Paper
HOVEY, Bradshaw [University at Buffalo] bhovey@buffalo.edu

Buffalonians are sure that it is their turn to be the next urban success story, the latest overnight sensation
declared by the burgeoning on-line urban media, the next cool city. More seasoned observers understand
whatever forward progress is being made has been decades in the making. But the question remains: how do we
explain the resurgence of city and their regions? And how do we prepare methodologically as well as
theoretically to ask and answer the question?
The dominant paradigm in the field is urban regime theory from Lefebvre to Logan and Molotch to Stone and
beyond. Rooted as it is in marxian analytics it has a powerful logic but it leaves one wondering what to do about
all of the other things that might be influencing urban fortunes. Earlier efforts privileged either structuralist
accounts from the right (Peterson) and the left (Gottdiener) or stories that gave broader reign to political agents,
especially through planning (Abbott, Clavel).
More recently, some have tried to broaden the structural context to include global processes of capital and
politics (Lauria). Some, like Benjamin Barber, have given new emphasis to city regions as sites of regeneration if
not resistance (also Katz; Mollenkopf et al; Imbroscio; even Florida). But what if we don't have to choose? Is there
room for explanatory theory that recognizes a range of factors. DeLeon wrote about "multiple conjunctural
causality" as if some might think it far-fetched. Urban regimes have an impact. Global flows of capital have an
impact. But so do insurgent practices from the grassroots as many have shown from E.P. Thompson's emergent
working class to Castells Grassroots to Herscher's "Unreal Estate."
This paper will attempt to sort out these contending perspectives, searching for a range and balance of
explanatory tools, and teasing out the methodological implications for historical research. The product will be a
prospectus and a guide for a more ambitious work on Buffalo urban history that aspires to give more than the
easy answers.
References
 Stone, Clarence. 1989. Regime Politics: Governing Atlanta, 1946-1988. University Press of Kansas.
 Abbott, Carl. 1983. Portland: Politics, Planning, and Growth in a Twentieth-Century City. University of
Nebraska Press.
 Imbroscio, David L. 1997. Reconstructing City Politics Alternative Economic Development and Urban
Regimes. Sage.
 Herscher, Andrew. 2012. The Unreal Estate Guide to Detroit. University of Michigan.
 Dreier, Peter, John Mollenkopf, and Todd Swanstrom. 2004. Place Matters: Metropolitics for the
Twenty-first Century. University Press of Kansas.

Abstract Index #: 554
BECOMING THE LENDER OF FIRST RESORT: FEDERAL FINANCING IN TWENTIETH-CENTURY RURAL AMERICA
Abstract System ID#: 1307
Individual Paper
SPINAK, Abby [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] aespinak@mit.edu
Financing is a key factor in planning and regional development, not just practically but also ideologically.
Recently, urban scholars have encouraged us to “follow the credit” in order to understand how our world has
come to be shaped and whose visions have created the financial instruments that enable processes of
development (Christophers and Gilbert 2011).
In this spirit, this paper explores how financing came to be a preferred tool of the federal government in rural
economic policy in the early twentieth century, and how federal loans became a major resource in developing
the American countryside. Debt financing was not unknown to early twentieth century rural comminuty, but
government loans were new. Prior to the twentieth century, small farmers and rural business owners had been at
the whims of private banks and individual lenders (Levy 2012); but, by mid-century, federal program had

become significant backers across rural America for everything from farm ownership to infrastructure
improvements to the purchase of household appliances.
The paper thus seeks to examine a moment of economic shift in rural America from private financing aimed
primarily at extracting wealth from rural comminuty to federal loan program aimed at more fully incorporating
rural comminuty into national markets as both producers and consumers.
It further explores contradictory responses to these federal loans. While many of these early twentieth century
federal loan program have been considered to be largely the result of Populist politics (Sanders 1999), farmers
were in practice skeptical of such loans. They had seen private farm mortgages ruin their families and neighbors
many times in the past: decades of predatory lending, coupled with the natural fluctuations of farm productivity
and the economic fluctuations of an increasingly market-focused agriculture had brought waves of economic
suffering to rural America. A popular poem from the era held that many farmers "died of mortgage" (Levy 2012).
It's understandable that, by the mid-twentieth century, farmers would have been wary of government loans. Still
reeling from agricultural price fluctuations of the 1920s, the Depression, and the environment ravages of the
Dust Bowl, they must have wondered how they would pay off these loans, or if federal loan program were yet
another set of predatory financing schemes destined to ruin whole comminuty. The paper questions how the
definitions of economy and development used by the federal loan program were not quite in sync with previous
Populist visions of government responsibilities to rural America.
This paper draws extensively on archival research on federal rural electrification financing and home
improvement loans through the Rural Electrification Administration and Electric Home and Farm Authority, as
well as histories of the Federal Farm Loan Act of 1916 and subsequent federal rural loan program through the
1930s (Adams 2003), in comparison with a growing literature on of the history of speculative finance in the rural
U.S. at the end of the 19th century (see, for example: Levy 2012; Baptist 2010).
References
 Jane Adams (ed.). 2003. Fighting for the Farm: Rural America Transformed. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press.
 Edward E. Baptist. 2010. “Toxic Debt, Liar Loans, and Securitized Human Beings.” Common-Place 10(3).
http://www.common-place.org/vol-10/no-03/baptist/
 Brett Christophers and Emily Gilbert. 2011. Discussion on "Follow the Thing: Money," Environment and
Planning D: Society and Space 29: 1068-1091.
 Jonathan Levy. 2012. Freaks of Fortune: The Emerging World of Capitalism and Risk in America.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
 Elizabeth Sanders. 1999. Roots of Reform: Farmers, Workers, and the American State, 1877-1917.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Abstract Index #: 555
STEWARDING THE RECENT PAST IN A FAST GROWING PRESENT: THE CASE OF ABU DHABI
Abstract System ID#: 1314
Individual Paper
HUSNEIN, Adnan [ALHOSN University] a.husnein@alhosnu.ae
While the roles of heritage have expanded from mere symbols of national unity and pride to encompass much
broader phenomena (Clark 2000), critics continue to debate over the potential use of heritage. Some consider
use to be among the biggest threats to heritage (Herbert 1995), others call for integrated heritage management
(Jokilehto 2004). However, these perspectives have not adequately addressed the issue of preserving cultural
heritage of a recent past. Moreover, it is often difficult to give something as broad a term as “cultural heritage” a
value, especially when an area is rapidly shifting.

My paper addresses the issues and concerns associated with preserving urban heritage in Abu Dhabi, UAE, where
the city has recently embarked on the next most ambitious wave of urban renewal (Vision 2030 2011). Abu Dhabi
presents a unique situation because the entire city— with the sole exception of the eighteenth-century Fort—
dates from the modern era (Damluji 2006).
The paper argues that while the cultural heritage in Abu Dhabi has been in vogue, concepts such as “architectural
and urban heritage” or “historic urban landscape” are shrouded with vagueness when it comes to their
application to the local context. Indeed, for many residents, there exists a sense of ambivalence about all the
glass-clad towers now piercing the skyline, for the places of their youth no longer exist.
I also argue that the threat to cultural heritage be seen as part of a wide process of change which is dislocating
central structures and processes of modern societies and undermining frameworks of stable anchorage. The
inclusion, therefore, of cultural heritage as a central feature of community and economic revitalization is key. The
implications of the latter point are far-reaching and open the door for questions relating to conservation planning
process vis-à-vis the overall democratization of decision making and political liberalization in the UAE.
In order to elicit local cultural values, the paper employs qualitative research methods, ranging from narratives
and analyses written by experts, to interviews of ordinary citizens, and focus groups, to mapping exercises and
transect walks conducted in a semester-long planning design studio.
This paper, by closely examining Abu Dhabi’s urban heritage, sheds new light on the neglected yet important
episode of the city’s evolution and endeavors to contribute to the ongoing debate surrounding the genesis of
cultural heritage.
References
 Clark, Kate (2000). From Regulation to Participation: Cultural Heritage, Sustainable Development and
Citizenship. In Forward Planning: The Functions of Cultural Heritage in a Changing Europe. Council of
Europe, 103-113. http://www.coe.int/T/E/Cultural_Co-operation/Heritage/Resources/ECCPAT(2001)161.pdf [accessed January 2014].
 Damluji, Slama S. ed. (2006). The Architecture of the United Arab Emirates. Reading, UK: Garnet
Publishing.
 Jokilehto, Jukka (2004). Sustainability and the Integrated Urban Heritage Management. The Sustainable
Urban Heritage Management – Local Community in Time of Change- Expert Seminar (21-24 April, 2004),
Vilnius, Lithuania.
 Loulanski, Tolina (2006). Cultural Heritage in Socio-Economic Development: Local and Global
Perspectives. Environments Journal 34(2).
 Sekler, E. (2001). Sacred spaces and the search for authenticity in the Kathmandu Valley. In Serageldu, I.,
Shluger, E., & Martin-Brown, J. (Eds). Historic city and Sacred Sites: Cultural Roots for Urban Futures.
Washington, D.C: The World Bank.

Abstract Index #: 556
THE BINATIONAL DOWNTOWN: CIUDAD JUÃ¡REZ-EL PASO
Abstract System ID#: 1359
Individual Paper
VAZQUEZ CASTILLO, Maria Teresa [Universidad Autónoma de Ciudad Juárez] ma.tere.vazquez@gmail.com
A seven minute walk through the International Paso del Norte/Santa Fe Bridge separates downtown Ciudad
Juárez (Mexico) from downtown El Paso (Texas). Due to the proximity from each other, one could dare to define
both downtowns as a regional binational downtown. This paper explores the historical economic forces that
developed both downtowns, as well as their interactions and their declines as suburbanization, economic
restructuring, and violence took place over time. It also explores the current efforts by both city of renovating
and rebuilding their downtowns. Since thousands of people cross the border each day between each city, this

paper explores this movement of people between two countries as building, rebuilding, and redefining the
functions of each downtown. Thus, this paper proposes the concept of the binational downtown as that one that,
regardless of the border line, exists because of the complementarity of their functions. The conceptualization of
the binational downtown provides grounds for regional planning across borders and provides planners with a
basic historical and regional background about these border city, as they are the closest ones from all the city
in the USA-Mexico border area, and the most economically and socially integrated.
References
 Dear, M. J. Why Walls Won't Work: Repairing the US-Mexico Divide. 2013.
 Staudt, Kathleen A., César M. Fuentes Flores, and Julia Estela Monárrez Fragoso. city and Citizenship at
the U.S.-Mexico Border: The Paso Del Norte Metropolitan Region. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010.
 Romero, Fernando. Hyperborder: The Contemporary U.S.-Mexico Border and Its Future. New York:
Princeton Architectural Press, 2008.
 Martinez, Oscar J., William H. Beezley, and Colin M. MacLachlan. US-Mexico Borderlands: Historical and
Contemporary Perspectives. USA: Scholarly Resources, 1996.
 Ortíz-González, Victor M. El Paso: Local Frontiers at a Global Crossroads. Minneapolis, Minn: University
of Minnesota Press, 2004.

Track 11: Planning Process, Administration, Law and Dispute
Resolution
Abstract Index #: 557
COMPARATIVE INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH: A CASE STUDY OF AUSTRALIA
Abstract System ID#: 81
Individual Paper
VELLA, Karen [Queensland University of Technology] k.vella@qut.edu.au, presenting author
SIPE, Neil [Griffith University] n.sipe@griffith.edu.au, primary author
In recent years there has been resurgence in international comparative analysis in the English-speaking world. As
Booth (2012) states, although comparative planning research is difficult, it can “sharpen both understanding and
practice if done with ... sensitivity to the cultural embeddedness of planning” (2012, 94). Reimer et al (2014)
provide a methodological framework for analyzing comparative international planning research. To examine
potential dimensions of change across national planning contexts, they suggest that analyses consider: 1) the
scope and objectives of planning; 2) modes and tools of planning; 3) scale; 4) actors and networks; and 5) policy
and planning styles.
Planning scholarship in Australia has been active over a period of approximately 50 years and the market for
scholarship has increased significantly in recent times. We build on antecedents from Stiftel and Mukhopadhyay
(2007) in the American context, to consider to what extent planning thought in Australia is influenced by thought
and research from elsewhere. The national affiliation of Authors in two English language Australian Planning
Journals are examined over a five year period from 2010-2014 in order to determine the extent of international
comparative research.
Using this dataset, we combine elements from Booth (2015) looking at goals and strategies of comparative
research with the five dimensions from Reimer et al (2014) to analyse contextual issues in international
comparative analyses. In doing so we are building an evaluation framework which could be applied in any
country.

References
 Kaba, A. J. (2012). Analyzing the Anglo-American Hegemony in the" Times Higher Education" Rankings.
Education Policy Analysis Archives, 20(21), 1068-2341
 Peel, D. (2008) Planning Education Forum: The internationalisation of planning education: issues,
perceptions and priorities for action. Town Planning Review 79(1), 87-123
 Reimer, M., Getimis, P., & Blotevogel, H. H. (2014). Spatial Planning system And Practices In Europe.
Spatial Planning system and Practices in Europe: A Comparative Perspective on Continuity and Changes,
Routledge, New York.
 Stiftel, B., & Mukhopadhyay, C. (2007). Thoughts on Anglo-American hegemony in planning scholarship:
Do we read each other's work?. Town Planning Review, 78(5), 545-572.
 Booth, P. (2015) What Can We Learn from France? Some reflections on the methodologies of crossnational research, in Silva, E.A., Healy, P., Harris, N. and Van den Broeck, P. The Routledge Handbook of
Planning Research Methods, Routledge, New York, 84-96

Abstract Index #: 558
DILLON'S RULE VERSUS THE COOLEY PRINCIPLE: REBALANCING LOCAL GOVERNANCE IN NEVADA
Abstract System ID#: 84
Individual Paper
DANIELSEN, Karen [University of Nevada, Las Vegas] karen.danielsen@unlv.edu
Nevada is a strict Dillon Rule State where all local government powers are solely granted by the state. The Dillon
Rule named for John Dillon, a 19th Century Iowan justice, who asserted that local governments are "creatures of
the state." An alternate doctrine, handed down by Justice Thomas Cooley, suggests that localities should be able
to have some measure of self-determination that has been alternately dubbed "Home Rule." In a state where the
fastest growing population is in Southern Nevada, observers have noted that Dillon's rule constricts the amount
of governance necessary to address the growing needs of of the Las Vegas region. This article analyzes the
historical impact of Dillon's rule in the state of Nevada by assessing historic governance adequacy looking at
legislative activity since 1947 compared to other states. The paper also compares the amount of bills introduced
to the biannual legislative session (known as Bill Draft Resolutions or BDRs) that favor either Northern and
Southern Nevada that actually become law. This paper shows that the amount of governance meted out to the
entire state has been fairly constant since the 1940s. Ironically, when the state was growing the most, legislation
was passed in the 1990s to permanently restrict the amount of bill drafts the legislature would consider. The
paper finds that more bills are passed on a consistent basis that favor Northern Nevada than Southern Nevada
from the last twenty years (10 sessions). The paper considers the economic and social impact of the unequal
delivery of government services and critical infrastructure to Southern Nevada which is still growing.
References
 Research Division. 1983. Speeding up Session Workflow Background Paper 83-1. edited by Nevada
Legislative Counsel Bureau. Carson City, NV: Nevada Legislative Counsel Bureau
 Council of State Governments. Various years. The State Legislatures. Edited by Council of State
Governments, The Book of the States. Lexington, KY: Council_of_State_Governments.
 Bowman, Ann O'M and Richard Kearney. 2012. Are city Losing Power and Authority? Perceptions of
Local Government Actors. Urban Affairs Review 48 (4):528-546.

Abstract Index #: 559
THE ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT OF SUSTAINABILITY INITIATIVES
Abstract System ID#: 282
Individual Paper
HAWKINS, Christopher [University of Central Florida] christopher.hawkins@ucf.edu, presenting author, primary
author

KRAUSE, Rachel [University of Kansas] rmkrause@ku.edu
FEIOCK, Richard [Florida State University] rfeiock@fsu.edu
Local sustainability is a complex issue, it is not a traditional function of city government, and it does not easily fit
within existing administrative silos. The environment, economic, and social dimensions of sustainability weave
together threads of numerous distinct core local government functions, which may lead to collective action or
coordination problems that arise from functionally fragmented authority. Due to its complexity and because
sustainability is new to the local agenda, administrative apparatus have not been systematically developed to
coordinate its implementation and facilitate policy success. Absent an integrative coordination mechanism,
individual policy decisions generate inter-agency spillover effects, lead to inefficient outcomes, and stymie larger
city wide sustainability goals.
This research will begin to fill the lacunae surrounding local sustainability administration and functional collective
action dilemmas by identifying the formal and informal mechanisms that city employ to integrate decision
making on sustainability. Specifically it will address three questions: (1) What types of administrative
mechanisms have city employed to integrate sustainability? (2) What factors influence these administrative and
structural decisions? (3) What effect does the organizational structure and mechanism used to manage
sustainability have on the design and implementation of sustainability program and policy instruments?
These questions will be empirically examined using survey city survey data contained in the Integrated City
Sustainability Database (ICSD) and archival sources for a national sample of US city. Because city operate
within institutional rules established by state government, multi-level is employed analyses to more accurately
specify the conditions under which various mechanisms to integrate sustainability arise and their consequences.

Abstract Index #: 560
MAKING SENSE (OF PLACE): FACILITATION, SPATIAL REASONING, AND COLLABORATIVE environment
MANAGEMENT ON CAPE COD, MASSACHUSETTS, USA
Abstract System ID#: 373
Pre-organized Session: Collaborative Challenges: Scales and Institutions
MILZ, Dan [University of Illiniois at Chicago] dmilz2@uic.edu
Despite widespread collaborative planning efforts, global water quality continues to deteriorate. Non-point
source pollution—and the consequent ecological damage—is not going away. The coastal estuaries on Cape Cod,
for instance, are still experiencing declines in water quality due to excess nitrogen loads leaking from individual
septic system. To address this issue, comminuty on the Cape updated their regional wastewater plan and
produced an exhaustive catalogue of wastewater treatment technologies as stakeholders searched for an ideal
technical fix.
Technological solutions, however, demand high political and financial costs because the scale of the resource
requires their comprehensive application. Individual actions and responsibilities thus need to be realigned in the
face of such spatial scale mismatches. To that end, the Cape initiated a comprehensive stakeholder engagement
process, which framed participation within shared embayment watersheds. Stakeholder groups met on forty-five
separate occasions in 2013 and 2014 to discuss the problem and identify solutions. Professional mediators were
retained throughout to facilitate these meetings.
By shifting discussion away from fixed positions, facilitation can foster collaboration by helping participants
identify opportunities for joint gains. Yet, mediators and facilitators do more than just broker tradeoffs. Astute
facilitation can foster joint cognitive and agency gains, as well. Rhetorical choices - made in the moment by
facilitators - can affect how groups comprehend the spatial complexities of social-ecological system to help them
craft more effective plans.

In this paper, I explore how scale-based facilitation moves helped stakeholders on Cape Cod rebuild a shared
sense of place. The moves took advantage of active spatial reasoning processes during group deliberation about
water quality and wastewater treatment. They promoted a vision of the Cape as a set of shared watersheds,
instead of one Cape carved into individual jurisdictional territories.
I analyzed discourse from planning meetings to show how the facilitation moves affected the subsequent flow of
conversations. To do so, I recorded meetings to capture verbal exchanges between participants. I analyzed the
coded records to identify evidence of active spatial reasoning. I assumed that blends between different scales
(e.g. hydrologic and jurisdictional) and levels (e.g. local and regional) represent efforts to address mismatches by
the group. I also identified facilitation moves made by mediators to assess their impact on how the group
blended the different scales and levels. These moves appeared to take four conceptual forms: spatialgeneric/specific, and aspatial-generic/specific.
Results suggest that the spatial-specific facilitation moves helped stakeholders suspend, but not abandon, their
individual interests. Instead, they proposed actions that fit the flow of water on the Cape by discursively blending
town-based and watershed-based geographies. Conversations shifted toward a sense of the Cape that recognized
the spatial interdependencies between individual towns and property owners. Collaboration, in the minds of the
stakeholders, became not just a possibility but a requirement. The other three facilitation moves did not appear
to prompt similar patterns of conceptual spatial blending. Conversations, by continuing to separate towns and
watersheds, failed to engage with the Cape’s complex spatial relationships.
My results show that subtle changes in discursive framing had positive effects on group dynamics. This suggests a
practical benefit of training planners to use concrete spatial concepts to shape their talk as they interact with
stakeholders. Facilitation also appears to have supported single-loop learning events aimed at rebuilding a shared
sense of Cape Cod. This process alone cannot have lasting effects on participants’ beliefs, values, and chosen
policies, nor can it call into question the systemic factors driving the problem’s severity. However, if these
collaborative processes are sustained over time, more transformative changes may result.
References
 Shmueli, D. F., et al. (2008). "Mining Negotiation Theory for Planning Insights." Journal of Planning
Education and Research 27(3): 359-364.
 Glenn, P. and L. Susskind (2010). "How Talk Works: Studying Negotiation Interaction." Negotiation
Journal 26(2): 117-123.
 Margerum, R. D. (2011). Beyond consensus: improving collaborative planning and management.
Cambridge, Mass., MIT Press.
 Trope, Y. and N. Liberman (2010). "Construal-level theory of psychological distance." Psychological
Review 117(2): 440-463.
 Lakoff, G. and M. Johnson (2003). Metaphors we live by. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press.

Abstract Index #: 561
NAVIGATING OVERLAPPING AND MULTIPLE ACCOUNTABILITIES IN MULTISCALAR CONSERVATION NETWORKS:
LESSONS FROM THE COLLABORATIVE FOREST LANDSCAPE RESTORATION PROGRAM
Abstract System ID#: 414
Pre-organized Session: Collaborative Challenges: Scales and Institutions
BUTLER, William [Florida State University] wbutler@fsu.edu, presenting author, primary author
CHRISTENSEN, Rachel [Florida State University] christensen.rachel.a@gmail.com
This paper examines the interplay between formal and informal accountability in conservation networks through
a study of the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration Program (CFLRP). Networks are increasingly viewed as
preferred avenues for addressing complex environment problems that cross regional boundaries and operate at
multiple scales. CFLRP participants, representing nonprofits, private sector organizations, and public agencies,
have developed collaborative networks operating at two scales: landscape scale multistakeholder collaboratives

and cross-collaborative networks. Through interviews, field observation, and document analysis, we examine
network interactions at both the landscape collaborative scale and at the cross collaborative network scale to
gather participant perspectives and explain how network activities are shaping restoration practice on the
ground. Utilizing a grounded theory approach, we are especially interested in practitioners’ experiences of
accountability and responsibility to and with each other. In non-hierarchical network contexts, system of
accountability are less structured and less visible than many contractual intergovernmental or intersectoral
relationships. CFLRP participants demonstrate that the principles of felt responsibility and reciprocity afford
opportunities for holding themselves and each other accountable. However, individual network participants
operate in governmental and regulatory contexts that are constrained by formal monitoring and accountability
systems. As a result, when there are competing claims on staff time or resources, it is difficult to prioritize
network activities over activities related to regulatory or funder demands. Within this context, we identify how
network participants capitalize on the benefits of networks—informality, adaptability, and flexibility—while also
maintaining accountability to each other for accomplishing shared goals in conservation and restoration work.
References
 Goldstein, B. E., & Butler, W. H. (2010). Expanding the Scope and Impact of Collaborative Planning:
Combining Multi-stakeholder Collaboration and comminuty of Practice in a Learning Network. Journal
of the American Planning Association, 76(2), 238-249.
 Romzek B, LeRoux K, Blackmar J (2012) A Preliminary Theory of Informal Accountability among Network
Organizational Actors. Public Administration Review 72 (3):442-453
 Weber EP (2003) Bringing Society Back In: Grassroots Ecosystem Management, Accountability, and
Sustainable comminuty. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
 Wyborn C, Bixler RP (2013) Collaboration and Nested environment Governance: Scale Dependency,
Scale Framing, and Cross-Scale Interactions in Collaborative Conservation. Journal of environment
Management 123:58-67

Abstract Index #: 562
DERAILED PRINCIPLES: PARTNERSHIPS, PARTICIPATION, AND SOCIAL JUSTICE IN NEW ORLEANS RAIL PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 477
Individual Paper
LOWE, Kate [University of New Orleans] kate.lowe@uno.edu, presenting author, primary author
EHRENFEUCHT, Renia [University of New Orleans] rehrenfe@uno.edu
Planning scholars have repeatedly observed how planning practice often works at the intersection of conflicting
objectives, with equity being only one of many (Campbell, 1996; Fainstein, 2010). Because of these tensions,
planning practitioners and academics need to more explicitly confront how institutions and partnerships are
structured in ways that exclude or deprioritize key American Planning Association principles related to
meaningful participation, accessible information, and the needs of disadvantaged groups. In this paper, we
analyze a case study of a contentious freight rail planning process and through it identify how institutionalized
partnerships affect the pursuit of these principles.
The case study involves a proposed rerouting that would move one segment of the New Orleans rail freight
network from an affluent, predominantly white community into low-income comminuty, with high shares of
minority residents. For more than a decade, transportation officials, the railroads, and elected leaders from the
affluent suburb have been discussing the rerouting as part of ongoing efforts to address regional freight rail
movements. In 2013, community leaders, from neighborhood which would be affected by the rerouted rail
system, mobilized to oppose the rerouting. As they sought information, community advocates directly faced
barriers to obtaining information. As the situation unfolded, a public agency discouraged planning faculty from
technical assistance efforts, including providing community members with background on federal environment
justice rules. Following the public agency’s response, some university-based actors expressed concern that
providing technical assistance for the community groups would disrupt funding from and relationships with area
transportation agencies.

This paper examines the following question: How did the structure of public and private transportation alliances
impact 1) the community group’s ability to engage and obtain information, 2) the approach of public agencies,
and 3) the role of the public university? The qualitative case study draws on multiple data sources. We utilize
participant observation in the community planning efforts and public meetings, the historic plans evaluating rail
capacity and the need for rail improvements, the environment review documentation, and key informant
interviews.
Findings have relevance for planning practice and theory. Through case study analysis, we demonstrate how
alliances between private and quasi-public actors impeded the opportunities for public entities and university
partners to work towards equity. As a result, using private-public partnerships to meet collective goals can
systematically include (Purcell, 2009) powerful firms in ways that shape attention and block progress toward
planning’s ethical principles on information sharing, a special obligation to disadvantaged residents, and
meaningful public participation. We also argue the shift to academic capitalism (Slaughter & Rhoades, 2004) can
impact planning education, as well as influence how university partners interact with community-based partners.
We suggest practitioners should design processes that take into account access and information asymmetries. In
addition, planning faculty can utilize the protection of the tenure-track and discretion of academic freedom to
partner with disadvantaged groups and bring attention to issues that would otherwise go unexamined.
References
 Campbell, S. (1996). Green city, growing city, just city?: urban_planning and the contradictions of
sustainable development. The Journal of the American Planning Association, 62(3), 296-312.
 Fainstein, S. (2010). The just city. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
 Purcell, M. (2009). Resisting neoliberalization: Communicative planning or counter-hegemonic
movements? Planning Theory, 8(2), 140-65.
 Slaughter, S. & Rhoades, G. (2004) Academic capitalism and the new economy: Markets, state, and
higher education. Baltimore, MD: The John Hopkins University Press.

Abstract Index #: 563
GENERATION AND FLOW OF KNOWLEDGE IN NETWORKED WATERSHED GOVERNANCE
Abstract System ID#: 490
Individual Paper
KELLOGG, Wendy [Cleveland State University] w.kellogg@csuohio.edu, presenting author, primary author
SAMANTA, Aritree [Levin College of Urban Affairs, Cleveland State University] aritree.s@gmail.com
Networked governance plays an important role in watershed planning and management due to the need for a
broad range of expertise, scarce resources, government mandates, and increased awareness of watersheds as
complex socio-ecological system (Folke 2006; Janssen et al, 2006). Through this research we explore how
knowledge for watershed planning and management is created and shared in an urbanizing watershed in NE
Ohio. Governance there has self-organized into a complex network of public, private and NGO organizations in a
unique model. We sought to characterize the overall structure of the inter-organizational and personal networks
as these influence the generation and flow of knowledge (instrumental and tacit) (Pahl-Wostl et al 2007)
necessary for effective planning and implementation. Networked governance may foster social learning and
other knowledge sharing or bridging that accumulates the experiences needed to cope with surprise and
turbulence so that governance of the SES builds adaptive capacity (Pahl-Wostl et al 2007); Innes and Booher
1999).
We use a combination of institutional and network frameworks (Hardy and Koonz 2009; Bodin, & Crona, 2009) to
understand both the structure of inter-organizational interactions and the flow of knowledge as these shape
adaptive capacity. Our data comes from 20 semi-structured interviews with watershed actors, and document and
web page review of more than 200 organizations somehow connected to watershed and land conservation
activities. We generate the network structure maps using UCINET software and NETDRAW.

Our research questions focused on: 1) whether patterns of interaction discerned through a network analysis,
combined with responses from the interviews with stakeholders, could identify a “core” group of organizations
likely to exert the most influence on planning and implementation in general and knowledge generation, sharing,
and use in particular; 2) which organizations perform a bridging function to activate “structural holes” (Ahuja
2004) of knowledge in the network, leading to knowledge sharing and perhaps innovation; 3) how organizational
participation in more than one type of activity (constitutional, collective policy making and operational) and
across different geographies (subwatersheds and jurisdictions) may indicate an important role in generation and
diffusion of knowledge; 4) whether and how interactions in different settings (plan making, projects, etc.) allow
individuals to learn through social learning and build capacity to adapt to and plan for future conditions in the
watershed to enhance resilience of the SES.
Planning educators and practitioners will gain understanding of the long-term knowledge-related capacitybuilding mechanisms and processes that support watershed planning, policy development, implementation and
decision-making. This knowledge will inform scholars engaged in research about water resource planning and
management, those interested in social-ecological complex adaptive system, and those interested in the use of
social network analysis software as a research tool.
References
 Ahuja, G. 2000. Collaboration Networks, Structural Holes, and Innovation: A Longitudinal Study.
Administrative Science Quarterly 45 (3): 425-455.
 Bodin, O. & Crona, B. 2009. The Role of social networks in natural resource governance: What relational
patterns make a difference? Global environment Change 3: 366-374. Folke, C., 2006. Resilience: The
Emergence of A Perspective For Social–Ecological system Analyses. Global environment Change 16:
253–67.
 Hardy, S. and Koontz, T. 2009. Rules for Collaboration: Institutional Analysis of Group Membership and
Levels of Action in Watershed Partnerships. The Policy Studies Journal 37(3): 393-413
 Janssen, M., Bodin, O., Anderies, J., Elmqvist, T., Ernstson, H., McAllister, R., & ... Ryan, P. (2006). Toward
a network perspective of the study of resilience in social-ecological system. Ecology & Society 11(1).
 Pahl-Wostl, C., M. Craps, A. Dewulf, E. Mostert, D. Tabara, and T. Taillieu. 2007. Social Learning and
Water Resources Management. Ecology and Society 12(2): 5 [online] URL
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org.

Abstract Index #: 564
THE UNEXAMINED WORK OF CITY PLANNERS: STAFF REPORTS
Abstract System ID#: 508
Individual Paper
JOHNSON, Bonnie [University of Kansas] bojojohn@ku.edu, presenting author, primary author
LYLES, Ward [University of Kansas] wardlyles@ku.edu
“Much of the real meat of a planner’s work is in reports” (Armentrout, 2003, p. 272) and much of that is in
writing a specialized kind of report called a “staff report”. Meck and Morris (2004, p. 2) note, “(w)riting staff
reports on proposed developments and permit applications is a core skill of planning practice” yet, “their
preparation is a topic about which there is surprisingly little written”. If every U.S. city with 10,000 population or
above (2,970 city) (2010 U.S. Census) has someone writing a staff report every month, that is over 35,500 staff
reports per year. This number is probably low because it does not include counties or city that produce multiple
staff reports every month. A review of the planning literature reveals only three works (Erley, 1976; Meck &
Morris, 2004; Swift, 2014) specifically on the topic and referencing small samples of staff reports. This leaves
important unanswered questions: what is the basic content and structure of these staff reports, what best
practices are out there, what does all this work say about the planning profession, and what should we be
teaching future planners?

Planners for city and counties write staff reports in response to applications to subdivide land, zone/rezone
property, amend plans, site plan, issue special/conditional use permits, or grant variances. A staff report contains
the applicant’s request, background information, a summary of planning staff and other staff input (public works,
parks and recreation, etc.), adherence to plans and regulations, analysis, and a recommendation for approval,
approval with conditions, denial, or continuance. A planner’s staff report usually goes to a citizen board like a
planning and zoning commission and then to the governing body for a final decision. The staff report might not
be glamorous, but it is the chief tool planners have to influence short-term decisions with long-term implications.
A sampling frame of all city ranging in size from 2,500 to over 1 million population in each state in the United
States was created. Between 2009 and 2010, city were randomly selected from each state and contacted via
email for an example of a “complex” and a “simple” zoning or similar staff report. 101 city from 43 states sent
staff reports. From this larger sample, we selected simple staff reports from 94 city in 41 states. The city
represented in the final sample ranged in population from 2,501 (Dillingham, AK) to 8,274,527 (New York, NY).
Using established research on what makes for quality plans (P. Berke & Godschalk, 2009; P. R. Berke, Godschalk,
& Kaiser, 2006; Lyles & Stevens, 2014) and the little that has been written on quality staff reports; we created a
coding instrument to analyze the major components and formats of staff reports. Our findings indicate that staff
report formats are similar, but they do not necessarily correspond to what has been considered the “state of the
art” from 1976/2004. There seems to be no difference in the quality or content of staff reports based on city
population size or report page length. We looked for staff reports that combined the best of rational theory (fact
based, legally defensible content) with the best of communicative/collaborative theory (easy to read, accessible
to citizens, inclusivity) (Brooks, 2002; Innes & Booher, 1999). We found very few reports meeting what one might
expect of a 21st century staff report drawing on both sets of theories. We speculate that the next generation of
staff reports and planners will need to use interactive, electronic media, graphic displays, and, quite possibly 50
years after Davidoff’s famous article, advocacy theory.
References
 Armentrout, V. N. (2003). Written Communication. In M. C. Dendekar (Ed.), The Planner's Use of
Information (pp. 263-292). Chicago, IL: Planners Press.
 Berke, P., & Godschalk, D. (2009). Searching for the Good Plan: A Meta-Analysis of Plan Quality Studies.
Journal of Planning Literature, 23(3), 227-240. doi: 10.1177/0885412208327014
 Erley, D. (1976). Writing Better Zoning Reports: Planning Advisory Service Report No. 321. Chicago, IL:
American Society of Planning Officials.
 Lyles, W., & Stevens, M. (2014). Plan Quality Evaluation 1994–2012: Growth and Contributions,
Limitations, and New Directions. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 34(4), 433-450. doi:
10.1177/0739456x14549752
 Meck, S., & Morris, M. (2004). Formatting and Writing the Staff Report. Zoning Practice, 21(10), 1-7.

Abstract Index #: 565
INSTITUTIONAL CONNECTIVITY ACROSS GOVERNANCE PROCESSES FOR NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 534
Pre-organized Session: Collaborative Challenges: Scales and Institutions
POTTS, Ruth [Queensland University of Technology] rm.potts@hdr.qut.edu.au
Power, agency and the interactions of individuals, and institutions inherently drive the decision-making capacity
and connectivity of structures within planning system. Consequently, it is difficult to understand the dynamics of
planning system without considering the connections that exist between institutions involved in planning
processes. Issues of collaboration, integration, and coordination have been at the forefront of planning literature
in recent decades as theorists and practitioners recognise the significant influence of connectivity on both
planning processes and outcomes. Despite this, there has been limited examination of connectivity and its
influence on outcomes in complex and multiscalar planning system, such as those surrounding planning for

natural resources. Using an analytical framework derived from structural-functionalism, this paper examines the
influence of connectivity between institutions on planning processes and their outcomes in two Australian
natural resource management regions. The paper draws on theories of network governance, and collaborative
governance to discuss its findings and identify lessons for governance analysis and planning practice.
Abstract Index #: 566
FORKS IN THE ROAD: CRITICAL QUESTIONS IN DESIGNING COMMUNITY COLLABORATIVE PROCESSES
Abstract System ID#: 536
Pre-organized Session: Collaborative Challenges: Scales and Institutions
KAUFMAN, Sanda [Cleveland State University] s.kaufman@csuohio.edu, presenting author, primary author
OZAWA, Connie [Portland State University] ozawac@pdx.edu
SHMUELI, Deborah [University of Haifa] deborah@geo.haifa.ac.il
Collaborative decision making processes have become the norm in planning at various scales, from community to
metropolitan, regional and national. Process design has benefitted from knowledge accumulated at all scales,
including how to convene stakeholders, how to the information base jointly, and how to structure and conduct
meetings. Nonetheless, obstacles to success remain. Some are case-specific, hinging on the quality of design and
facilitation. We propose to highlight here some aspects of collaboratives that remain problematic at all scales
even with good design, needing attention to increase the likelihood of success.
The three aspects we discuss here are:
• Implementation of agreements: even when, by several measures including participant satisfaction a
collaborative process has worked well, few or none of the actions agreed-upon take place. While
arguably the deliberative processes have intrinsic value, lack of implementation is almost always
detrimental to the environment and often also misses opportunities to improve quality of life. We
explore reasons, beyond status quo inertia highlighted by Susskind & Cruikshank (1987) and by Layzer
(2011).
• Representation: even when stakeholding groups have been comprehensively identified and have
representatives in the collaborative process, these often fail to provide the communication link back to
their constituents. One consequence can be that uninformed constituents fail to understand the process
and the agreement, impeding implementation. We explore this and other aspects of representation
including the effects of hidden agendas, and of repeatedly tapping the same people in a community
because the agencies know them or because they are able to put in the necessary time.
• Facilitation/mediation: beyond the obvious need for quality intervention, questions include which type
of intervention is appropriate in specific cases, whether processes benefit more from outsider or insider
intervention, and how much substantive knowledge interveners need along with process skills. For
example, collaborative processes emerge around conflicts, proposed initiatives or both; do they call for
different types of intervention? Does familiarity with the context or substantive proficiency affect
interveners’ credibility and effectiveness? We explore which intervener qualities enhance their
effectiveness.
We illustrate these three aspects of collaborative processes with the West Eugene Collaborative (WEC) formed
around a contested transportation corridor project. The multi-year project (2007-2009) involved several
professional interveners and produced a celebrated consensus document, transforming the public discussion
from one about a highway to a “complete street” boulevard. The Collaborative’s strategy reflected the character
and strength of the relationships WEC members developed, and increased the community credibility of their
vision. About the effort, then Mayor Kitty Percy said, “To me that is a very big deal.” (Pittman, 2009). Months
after reaching agreement, WEC members presented it to the state’s Transportation Commission, which was duly
impressed by their work and encouraged the Oregon Office of Transportation to work with the WEC to
implement project ideas. Despite the impressive process, implementation failed to occur. In this paper, we look
at the positive value of the process, and at key decision points which we argue influenced greatly the fate of the
recommendations. We use an approach (developed in Kaufman et al. 2014) involving data collected through

interviews with key participants and facilitators, documents, and participants’ responses to a survey by the US
Institute for environment Conflict Resolution.
References
 Kaufman, S., Ozawa, C. & Shmueli, D. (2014) Evaluating participatory decision processes: Which methods
inform reflective practice? Journal of Evaluation and Program Planning 42: 11–20.
 Layzer, J. (2011). The environment Case: Translating Values into Policy. CQ Press.
 Pittman, Alan (, 2009). Eugene Weekly, West Eugene Collaborative News, March 26.
 Susskind L. and Cruikshank J. (19), Breaking the Impasse: Consensual Approaches to Resolving Public
Disputes. Basic Books.

Abstract Index #: 567
THE POLITICAL CONSTRUCTION OF ENERGY JUSTICE MOVEMENT AROUND THE CITY
Abstract System ID#: 551
Individual Paper
SHIN, Nah-yoon [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] nyshin@mit.edu
As a 'developmental state', South Korean government has long seen nuclear technology as a primary engine for
national economic growth. Unlike the United States that faced strong opposition from anti-nuclear activists
during the 1960s, the construction of Kori 1, the first nuclear reactor built near the second largest city in Korea,
was met with little resistance from civil society under authoritarian regime that began in the early 1960s
following a military coup d’etat. Local residents, many of whom were displaced into adjacent comminuty,
accepted government’s proposal to site nuclear facilities hoping that “electricity-producing factories” would
flourish national economy.
Some thirty years later, the recent dispute over the continued operation of Kori 1 revealed the changed political
landscape and power relationships. Since the angry public's initial outburst in 2006 when Korea Hydro Nuclear
Power filed its relicensing proposal, Korean government introduced a series of considerable procedural reforms
for public participation. How is local opposition to policy decisions to relicense risky old nuclear reactor near the
big city mobilized? How did the local comminuty, environmentists and local politicians, who seemingly have
different interests and political ideologies, negotiate and reconcile their differences, and were able to put forth
common alternatives? In answering these questions, this paper examines the role that negotiation plays in
historical processes of coalition-building.
References
 Susskind, L., and J. Cruikshank. 1987. Breaking the Impasse: Consensual Approaches to Resolving Public
Disputes. Basic Books
 Forester, J. 2009. Dealing with Differences: Dramas of Mediating Public Disputes. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
 Sherman, Daniel J. 2011. Not Here, Not There, Not Anywhere: Politics, Social Movements, and the
Disposal of Low-Level Radioactive Waste. RFF Press.
 Giugni, Marco G. 1998. “Was It Worth the Effort? The Outcomes and Consequences of Social
Movements.” Annual Review of Sociology 24 (January): 371–93.

Abstract Index #: 568
CONTESTED VISIONS OF HEALTH  impact AND BROWNFIELDS REDEVELOPMENT: A CASE STUDY OF
CABOT/KOPPERS SUPERFUND SITE IN GAINESVILLE, FL
Abstract System ID#: 733
Individual Paper
STEINER, Ruth [University of Florida] rsteiner@dcp.ufl.edu, presenting author, primary author

LEWIS, Ferdinand [University of Florida] fslewis@ufl.edu
Many Smart Growth solutions stress the importance of brownfield redevelopment as a part of an overall strategy
to encourage efficient use of resources. Yet, brownfield redevelopment, and Superfund redevelopment in
particular, can be especially challenging and contentious. Developing a common vision for a site and its
neighborhood calls for a complex of factors coming into place sometimes over decades, including: The
remediation of on-site toxins; agreements between site owners, residents, and officials about the planning
process and future plans; understanding and preventing physical and economic  impact on community health.
This paper will examine the process associated with planning for redevelopment of the Cabot/Koppers Superfund
site in Gainesville, Florida, from the perspectives of the various stakeholders. This was formerly a creosote
treatment plant that used polychlorinated biphenols (PCB), arsenic, and other toxic chemicals, generating
residues that include dangerous levels of dioxin. Although the site was designated a Superfund site in 1983, the
subsequent planning process was largely informal and disjointed, delaying approval of the remediation plan for
thirty years. We will describe the critical contribution that planning could and should make to this ongoing
planning process, building relationships of trust and understanding, and negotiating successful remediation and
redevelopment with federal, state, and local actors, and facilitating the formulation and implementation of the
redevelopment plan.
Approach and Methodology:
This research presents a case study of the planning process associated with the development of the remediation
plan and the redevelopment plan for the site and the surrounding neighborhood. The study will include a
content analysis of documents related to the project and interviews with residents and public and private leaders
involved in the negotiation of the remediation plan.
References
 Eckstein, B. J., & Throgmorton, J. A. (Eds.). (2003). Story and sustainability: Planning, practice, and
possibility for American city. MIT Press.
 Greenberg, M., Lowrie, K., Mayer, H., Miller, K. T., & Solitare, L. (2001). Brownfield redevelopment as a
smart growth option in the United States. environmentist, 21(2), 129-143.
 Hamilton, J. T., & Viscusi, W. K. (1994). Human Health Risk Assessment for Superfund. Ecology LQ, 21,
573.
 McCarthy, L. (2002). The brownfield dual land-use policy challenge: reducing barriers to private
redevelopment while connecting reuse to broader community goals.  land_use Policy, 19(4), 287
 Pendergrass, J. (2002). Institutional controls in the States: what is and can be done to protect public
health at brownfields. Conn. L. Rev., 35, 1303.

Abstract Index #: 569
INTEGRATION OF PUBLIC HEALTH IN TRANSPORTATION PLANNING THROUGH KNOWLEDGE SHARING
Abstract System ID#: 736
Poster
LI, Jianling [University of Texas at Arlington] jjli@uta.edu, presenting author, primary author
CASEY, Colleen [University of Texas at Arlington] colleenc@uta.edu
Research has recognized the role of transportation in health outcomes (Corburn, 2009; Frank, Engelke, & Schmid,
2003; Hynes & Lopez, 2009). In response to the call for collaboration in transportation planning to address
transportation and public health challenges, organizations have increasingly engaged in collaborative activities at
all levels of governments and in the non-profit sector. Despite the encouraging momentum in recent years, the
level of involvement from health organizations is uneven across regions and the integration of public health has
not yet become a norm of planning practice in many area. An understanding of the underlying issues related to
organizational collaboration is critical for moving the existing momentum forward.

Knowledge sharing is critical for success in organizational collaboration. Network theory and the literature on
collaborative planning suggest that authentic dialogue, knowledge sharing, mutual learning, and consensus
building are critical elements for facilitating, sustaining, and enhancing network collaboration (Agranoff, 2007;
Innes & Booher, 2010; Margerum, 2011). Drawing upon scholarly work in network theory and collaborative
planning, we investigate the challenges of collaboration and opportunities for knowledge sharing among public
health and transportation planning organizations under the current regulatory and policy environment. The
primary data for this study was collected from a focus group interview and an Internet survey of leaders in the
transportation and public health comminuty in the Dallas-Fort Worth Metropolitan (DFW) area. The DFW is an
area where both comminuty are facing significant transportation and public health challenges, and there are
few formal regulations requiring the involvement of the public health community in the transportation planning
process. Results of this study suggest that there is a distinct gap in knowledge about respective fields. Moreover,
knowledge management activities largely rely on traditional face-to-face communications such as conference and
workshop. While data sharing and exchange do exist in current practices, there is a lack of utilization and/or
creation of shared databases. The study also identifies additional challenges at the policy and individual levels.
These findings signify opportunities for education and the leverage of communication tools for knowledge
sharing in the near future. This study demonstrates the usefulness of network theory in identifying challenges
and opportunities for collaboration. It also suggests actions for engaging public health organizations in the
transportation planning process and potential issues for future studies.
References
 Agranoff, R. (2007). Managing within Networks: Adding Value to Public Organizations. Washington DC:
Georgetown University Press.
 Corburn, J. (2009). Toward the Healthy City. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
 Hynes, H., & Lopez, R. (2009). Urban Health: Readings in the Social, Built, and Physical Environments of
U.S. city. . Boston: Jones and Bartlett Publishers.
 Innes, J. E., & Booher, D. E. (2010). Planning with Complexity: An Introduction to Collaborative
Rationality for Public Policy. London and New York: Routledge, Taylor and Francis Group.
 Margerum, R. D. (2011). Beyond Consensus: Improving Collaborative Planning and Management.
Cambridge, Massachusetts; London, England: MIT Press.

Abstract Index #: 570
THE INSTIGATION GAME: SERIOUS GAMES FOR INITIATING PRODUCTIVE BOUNDARY WORK IN INSTITUTIONAL
VOIDS
Abstract System ID#: 778
Pre-organized Session: Serious Games for Collaborative Planning
SCHENK, Todd [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] tschenk@mit.edu
Planning and decision-making increasingly involves addressing complex challenges in institutional voids, in which
responsibility is unallocated, scattered or unclear; the rules and norms of decision-making are weak; and science
and technical information is contested (Hajer, 2003). Collaborative boundary work can help stakeholders to
construct arrangements that promote collective and coordinated individual actions to address these challenges
(Quick and Feldman, 2014). Collaborative planning techniques to advance this boundary work are well
established, placing emphasis on stakeholder group representation and the application of good process to help
groups generate outcomes that are seen as ‘fair, efficient, stable and wise’ (Susskind and Cruikshank, 1987; Innes
and Booher, 2010).
A persistent issue is how to engage stakeholders, particularly in institutional voids in which actors do not feel
invested and the connections to their traditional institutional arrangements are unclear. This is particularly acute
when the challenges being addressed are not yet strongly felt, as is often the case when attempting to
proactively advance climate change adaptation planning. Both governmental and non-governmental actors are
often stretched for time and other resources, reducing their proclivity to engage in processes that they do not
see as immediately relevant to their work and interests.

This paper argues that serious games can instigate productive boundary work, building bridges and establishing
new foundations for groups to address challenges in institutional voids. They can offer low-cost, low-risk
opportunities to engage stakeholders and introduce them to emerging challenges, opportunities and connections
to their own work in safe sandbox-like simulated environments (Schenk, 2014).
This argument is substantiated based on research with infrastructure managers and other stakeholders in three
coastal city – Singapore, Rotterdam and Boston. Stakeholders were brought together to engage in a role-play
simulation exercise, which is a type of serious game. Participants were given a shared hypothetical challenge to
address, assigned roles other than those they fill in the real world (to facilitate perspective-taking), and provided
both shared general and role-specific confidential instructions to frame the issues and their interests and
perspectives. The challenge presented is a transportation infrastructure decision complicated by the release of
new information on the potential  impact of climate change. Rather than ignoring these new threats because of
their uncertainty and absence from the regulations and norms traditionally followed, the transportation agency
in the fictitious case has decided to assemble various stakeholders to collaboratively consider how they might
respond. Parties are challenged to consider potential climate threats and possible responses, including issues of
uncertainty and responsibility, while protecting their various interests.
A mixed-methods research approach was employed to garner insights from these exercise interventions.
Participants completed pre- and post-exercise surveys; extensive semi-structured interviews were conducted
both before and after the exercise interventions; the exercises were video recorded for coding and analysis; and
debrief conversations, which followed each exercise, were also recorded and coded.
The exercise elicited examination of how dynamic and uncertain threats like climate change that involve
institutional ambiguity might be addressed in planning and decision-making by bringing actors together to
deliberate. This paper focuses on how participation in the exercises changed participants’ perspectives on the
need to engage with each other to advance decision-making in the institutional void, and their understanding of
how they can effectively and efficiently go about this type of collaborative engagement. It contributes to planning
practice and scholarship around the use of serious games to instigate productive boundary work.
References
 Hajer, M. (2003). Policy without polity? Policy analysis in the institutional void. Policy Sciences, 36: 175195.
 Innes, J.E. and D.E. Booher (2010). Planning with Complexity: An Introduction to Collaborative
Rationality for Public Policy. New York, NY: Routledge.
 Quick, K.S. and M.S. Feldman (2014). Boundaries as Junctures: Collaborative Boundary Work for Building
Efficient Resilience. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, doi:10.1093/jopart/mut085
 Schenk, T. (2014). Boats and Bridges in the Sandbox: Using Role Play Simulation Exercises to Help
Infrastructure Planners Prepare for the Risks and Uncertainties Associated With Climate Change.
Infranomics: Sustainability, Engineering Design and Governance. A.V. Gheorghe, M. Masera and P.F.
Katina, eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer.
 Susskind, L. and J. Cruikshank (1987). Breaking the impasse: Consensual approaches to resolving public
disputes. New York, NY: Basic Books.

Abstract Index #: 571
FRAME OF REFERENCE AND PERCEIVED FAIRNESS
Abstract System ID#: 849
Individual Paper
ZHAO, Jinhua [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] jinhua@mit.edu, presenting author, primary author
WANG, Shenhao [MIT] shenhao@mit.edu

Fairness is an ambiguous but common value in many transportation policy. A distinction between perceived and
actual fairness is important because the perception of fairness, which plays an important role in people’s attitude
towards a policy, is not determined by actual fairness of distribution. We adopt a framework of referencedependent decision theories to analyze how people perceive a policy as fair or not. This perception process
involves the selection of reference levels, the mental accounting of gains and losses, the attention allocation to
salient attributes of a choice, and the calculation of perceived utility, which are mostly overlooked by traditional
analysis in the transportation field. We illustrate these theories in the policy of car license distribution in three
Chinese city, both qualitatively through a review of policy documents and quantitatively via a survey of public
perception. The three policy aim to mitigate traffic congestion respectively in Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou.
Aside from their similarities of quota setting and the proposed value of fairness, the specific distributive rules of
the three policy are divergent: Shanghai adopts auction, Beijing does lottery, and Guangzhou does a hybrid. The
difference arises from the fact that people from different city process their mental accounting and select
reference levels in different manners. Our finding has practical implications as well. Planners and policy makers
should understand the multiple dimensions of fairness and the mental process that people adopt to perceive the
fairness of a transportation policy. Since fairness is one critical component of policy acceptance, policy makers
should pay attention to both perceived and actual fairness to improve people’s acceptance of transportation
policies such as VMT taxes, toll roads or congestion charging.
References
 Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica:
Journal of the Econometric Society, 263-291.
 Quiggin, J. (1982). A theory of anticipated utility. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 3(4),
323-343.
 Shafir, E., & Thaler, R. H. (2006). Invest now, drink later, spend never: On the mental accounting of
delayed consumption. Journal of Economic Psychology, 27(5), 694-712.
 Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. science,
185(4157), 1124-1131.
 Rawls, J. (1999). A theory of justice: Harvard university press.

Abstract Index #: 572
POWER PLAYS: WASTE SITING AND NEGOTIATION
Abstract System ID#: 973
Individual Paper
SPURLOCK, Danielle [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] dspurloc@live.unc.edu
This paper examines the use of negotiation to address the challenges of siting locally undesirable  land_uses
(LULUs). The vast majority of the U.S. population directly and indirectly contributes to the production of solid and
hazardous waste through manufacturing processes and the consumption of goods. Current methods of waste
management depend on physical facilities to inter or treat wastes. Unfortunately, these methods are often
associated with air pollution and water contamination. The populations living near these physical facilities are
more acutely subject to the adverse  impact than the larger population benefiting from the waste facility. Thus,
waste disposal is a classic illustration of a social dilemma where the individual interests of a few conflict with the
interests of the larger society, which introduces the concepts of power and fairness into siting procedures.
Further complicating the tension between collective and individual interests are the associations among race,
ethnicity and income with the location of waste disposal facilities (Bryant and Mohai, 1992; Bullard, 2000).
Compensation (i.e., direct monetary compensation and indirect compensation through safety and monitoring
programs) has been suggested as a pragmatic, equitable, and efficient strategy for addressing the adverse
impacts of LULUs (Bingham and Miller, 1984). Proponents of the use of compensation recommend negotiation as
a method to incorporate compensation to minimize the appearance of bribery, and a number of states have
siting processes that legislate a negotiation process (Bingham and Miller, 1984). Yet compensation and its
possibility of more expeditious or financially efficient processes must be weighed against the provision of higher

quality outcomes for all stakeholders especially individuals and households from marginalized populations. This
paper investigates 1) how power is accounted for in state statutes that authorize and/or require formal
environmental dispute and 2) whether decisions negotiated using the prescribed procedures are viewed as
successful by all stakeholders.
By combining a content analyses of siting statutes with case studies of comminuty negotiating about a waste
facility, this study investigates how siting procedures account for the disparate power relations and resources
that can place low wealth neighborhood and comminuty of color at higher risk for the social, biological, and
economic hardships associated with the location of environment hazards. First, siting legislation is content
analyzed using a protocol that covers the initiation, participation, negotiation, failure procedures, and
implementation of the dispute resolution process. Additionally, Derrida’s deconstruction approach, which
emphasizes contextual examination, guides an analysis of how power is stated, ignored, hidden and emphasized
within the negotiation procedures described in siting statutes (Lukes, 1983). Next, case studies based on
stakeholder interviews, newspaper articles, and public meeting minutes explore the negotiation as well as the
pre- and post-negotiation phases (Paterson, 1999) with emphasis on stakeholders (i.e., state agencies granting
permits, host comminuty particularly low wealth and comminuty of color, non-governmental organizations,
and developers seeking the construction of waste facilities) perceptions of success.
The siting of LULUs can pose a risk to the health, safety, and welfare of the surrounding community. Such
irrevocable decisions deserve the highest attention not just to the suitability of the site, but also to the process
used to negotiate with the host community. Given the association of race, ethnicity and low wealth with the
siting of LULUs and the history of marginalization of these individuals and comminuty, it is imperative that the
procedures used to site these  land_uses be closely monitored for the structural inequality.
References
 Bingham, Gail and Miller, Daniel. (1984). “Prospects for Resolving Hazardous Waste Siting Disputes
Through Negotiation”. Natural Resources Law Review 17: 473-490.
 Bryant, Bunyan and Mohai, Paul. (Eds.). (1992). Race and the Incidence of environment Hazards.
Westview Press: San Francisco.
 Bullard, Robert. (2000). Dumping in Dixie: Race, Class, and environment Quality (3rd ed.). Westview
Press: Atlanta.
 Lukes, Steven. (1983). An Introduction & Power: A Radical View. In Power, A Radical View. New York:
MacMillian Press.
 Paterson. (1999). "Negotiated Development: Best Practice Lessons from Two Model Processes.” Journal
of Architectural and Planning Research 16:2 (summer), 133-148.

Abstract Index #: 573
A BLUES GEOGRAPHY: ALTERNATIVE DEVELOPMENT IN SKID ROW AND SOUTH CENTRAL
Abstract System ID#: 1026
Individual Paper
DOZIER, Deshonay [Graduate Center, CUNY] ddozier@gradcenter.cuny.edu
This paper entangles with the concepts of movement, containment, and displacement when evaluating punitive
policing and unjust housing practices in marginalized comminuty. Through an ethnographic study of Skid Row
and Historic South Central Los Angeles, this paper takes up the theoretical task of Clyde Woods’ blues
development tradition, the insurgent planning literature, and community development literature in its analysis.
With the expansion of Los Angeles city center adjacent to Skid Row, and the light rail development and University
of Southern California expansion aims in proximity to Historic South Central, the paper reveals that efforts
towards curtailing gentrification by grassroots activist and residents are based in developing alternative value
systems and civil resistance around land and property. And, that the cross-scalar conditions of movement,
containment, and displacement of residents, via policing, unjust housing practices, and neighborhood
disinvestment, are the effects in which residents work to change. Furthermore, this study takes seriously the

efforts towards property rights of Skid Row housed and unhoused residents, and the land and property
acquisition practices of South Los Angeles residents, as alternative development models against the historical and
systematic practices of hegemonic development in the region.
References
 Woods, Clyde A. (1998). Development Arrested: The Blues and Plantation Power in the Mississippi Delta.
London: Verso Books.
 Woods, C. forthcoming). Development Drowned and Reborn: The Blues and Bourbon Restoration inPostKatrina New Orleans. (Eds.) Laura Pulido & Jordan T. Camp. Atlanta: University of Georgia PressGeographies of Justice Series.
 Miraftab, F. (2009). Insurgent Planning: Situating Radical Planning in the Global South. Planning Theory,
8(1), p. 32-50.
 Holston (2008). Insurgent Citizenship: Disjunctions in Democracy and Modernity in Brazil. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
 Mitchell, D. (2003). The Right to the City: Social Justice and the Fight for Public Space. New York: The
Guilford Press.

Abstract Index #: 574
THE SMART GROWTH CATALYSTS REVISITED: WHO THEY ARE, AND HOW THEY WORK
Abstract System ID#: 1041
Individual Paper
APPLEYARD, Bruce [San Diego State University] bappleyard@mail.sdsu.edu
In line with the theme of this conference, “Justice and the city: (re)examining the past to create the future”, this
paper discusses a specific class of planning advocate, the Smart Growth Catalyst, first featured in a 2005 Planning
Magazine article by this paper’s author.
Today, as then, smart growth catalysts think expansively and engage in advocacy work and coalition building.
They often provide the spark needed to get smart growth initiatives off the ground by working with regional,
statewide, and local groups.
Building on the work of the original publication, this paper presents a more in-depth history of the Smart Growth
movement and its advocates, featuring new interviews with Smart Growth catalysts, and a deeper review and
analysis of the tradecraft of smart growth advocacy, covering such topics as:
•
•
•
•

Messaging.
How to identify key brokers within institutions and how to work with them effctively.
How be an effective source of information for elected and appointed officials.
How to earn coverage for your issues and become a reliable source for the press.

This paper will provide an in-depth analysis of various Smart Growth Catalyst groups, including 1000 Friends of
Oregon (and the related 1000 Friends groups in other states), Envision Utah, the Coalition for Smarter Growth in
the Washington, D.C. region, the Southern environment Law Center, the Conservation Law Foundation, and
others.
It will also examine the support for the catalysts' efforts from such national organizations as the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Smart Growth America, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the U.S. Green
Building Council, Transportation for America, the Natural Resources Defense Council, and other organizations.
References
 Appleyard, B. 2005. "The Smart Growth Catalysts." Planning. Planners Press.





Handy. S. 2005. "Smart Growth and the Transportation- land_use Connection: What Does the Research
Tell Us?" International Regional Science Review.
Cervero, R. 2003. "Road Expansion, Urban Growth, and Induced Travel: A Path Analysis," Journal of the
American Planning Association
Pollard, T. 2001. "Greening the American Dream." Planning. Planners Press.

Abstract Index #: 575
SERIOUS GAMES, SERIOUS LEARNING: AN EVALUATION OF THE EFFECTIVENESS OF ROLE-PLAY SIMULATIONS
AS A PUBLIC EDUCATION AND ENGAGEMENT TOOL FOR SCIENCE-INTENSIVE PLANNING ISSUES
Abstract System ID#: 1085
Pre-organized Session: Serious Games for Collaborative Planning
RUMORE, Danya [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] drumore@mit.edu
Science-intensive social and environment planning issues such as climate change adaptation present a
considerable challenge for planners and comminuty, who must grapple with how to collectively respond despite
irreducible uncertainty, differing perspectives, and limited resources and capacity. It has been suggested that
role-play simulations (RPSs) offer a promising approach through which to enhance the readiness of comminuty
to collectively tackle such issues. Yet, the effectiveness of RPS exercises as a public education and engagement
strategy for science-intensive planning concerns had not previously been systematically tested. This paper draws
on the findings of the New England Climate Adaptation Project (NECAP) to evaluate the efficacy of RPS exercises
as a public education and engagements strategy for climate change adaptation. Through a series of workshops,
NECAP engaged a total of 510 people across four New England coastal comminuty (Barnstable, MA; Cranston,
RI; Dover, NH; and Wells, ME) in playing an RPS exercise; the RPS used in each town or city was tailored to reflect
the key climate change risks facing the locality and local political dynamics. Research data were collected through
questionnaires administered to all workshop participants before and after the simulation, follow-up in-depth
interviews with a total of 140 workshop participants, and ongoing observation. Reporting on the qualitative and
quantitative findings from this study, this paper discusses the extent to which participation in the RPS exercises
(1) enhanced individual and community literacy about climate change risks and adaptation responses; (2)
educated the public about the dynamics of collective risk management decision-making; (3) fostered shared
learning; and (4) built support for climate change risk management efforts. It explains what the findings from this
study say about how people learn from RPS exercises and what this means for the potential of role-plays as a
public education and engagement tool for other science-intensive social and environment planning issues. The
paper concludes with lessons learned for how to effectively design and use RPS exercises for planning support.
References
 Susskind, L. and Rumore, D. (2013) Collective climate adaptation: Can games make a difference?,
Solutions Journal, February.
 Susskind, L. (2010) Responding to the Risks Posed by Climate Change: city Have No Choice but to
Adapt, Town Planning Review, 81 (3): 217-235
 Innes, J.E. and D.E. Booher (2010). Planning with Complexity: An Introduction to Collaborative
Rationality for Public Policy. New York, NY: Routledge.
 Innes, J. and D. Booher (1999). Consensus building as role playing and bricolage: Toward a theory of
collaborative planning. Journal of the American Planning Association, 65 (1), 9–26.
 Argyris, C. and D. Schon (1996) Organizational Learning II: Theory, Method, and Practice. FT Press.

Abstract Index #: 576
DESIGNING SIMULATIONS AND SIMULATING DESIGN: REPRESENTING VACANCY IN NEW ORLEANS
Abstract System ID#: 1092
Pre-organized Session: Serious Games for Collaborative Planning
CHERAMIE, Kristi [The Ohio State University] cheramie.1@osu.edu, presenting author, primary author

BOSWELL, Jacob [The Ohio State University] boswell.33@osu.edu
VAN MAASAKKERS, Mattijs [The Ohio State University] vanmaasakkers.1@osu.edu
The City of New Orleans contains more than 30,000 vacant or blighted parcels (Plyer and Ortiz, 2012). Though
population has been declining in New Orleans since the 70s, dramatically increased vacancy rates tied to
Hurricane Katrina have strained the political and social landscape of the city. By 2012, the City had assumed
ownership of approximately 10,000 vacant properties (Office of Community Development, 2012). The responsible
city agencies, primarily the New Orleans Redevelopment Authority and the New Orleans Department of Code
Enforcement, employ multiple management approaches in relation to these vacant parcels. One prominent
strategy is to offer vacant lots for sale to adjacent residents, in the popular “lot next-door” program. In addition,
vacant lots are offered for sale to the general public through auctions or can be leased by community groups with
an interest in urban gardening. Yet these program have left the city still holding approximately 2,400 vacant
parcels that have attracted little or no economic or community interest. Currently, the City mows these lots in
order to reduce the appearance of blight in the streetscape at a significant expense. The city’s narrow focus on
reducing governmental responsibility, both legally and financially, by selling or leasing single lots, has limited its
ability to aggregate and strategically redevelop vacant lots for a broader range of purposes. Where the New
Orleans Redevelopment Authority has undertaken strategic aggregation of lots to enable larger scale
development, the process has been slow and difficult.
The question at the center of this research project is therefore how to recalibrate the decision-making process
about re-using vacant land -- transforming the city’s market-oriented approach into one that is collaborative and
data-rich; one that can engage (or re-engage) a new and broader range of stakeholders by fostering creative
strategies for obtaining legal access to vacant land and layering stakeholder driven program. This kind of
decision-making requires detailed information, broad participation and the capacity to educate stakeholders
about alternative futures for perceived urban problems. Serious games have the potential to convey these
complexities to participants in a readily digestible way. Negotiations about vacant parcels can be simulated,
placing stakeholders at the helm of projective planning discussions and facilitating their ability to visualize change
at the scale of single lots and, more importantly, at the scale of the neighborhood or district.
This project employs a series of negotiation simulations about vacant land in the City of New Orleans. The project
augments existing serious gaming methods with a range of visual tools intended to deepen awareness of the
spatial implications implicit in planning frameworks and track coalition dynamics during the negotiation process.
These tools were developed through policy analysis, semi-structured interviews with 10 stakeholders from New
Orleans and iterative testing over a period of 8 months. The outcomes of this participatory research project
indicate that 1) these simulations can bring together diverse audiences and allow for the development of new
forms of participation in  land_use planning, 2) by focusing on reaching consensus about the program to be
developed on a (set of) vacant parcel(s), new coalitions emerge between stakeholders otherwise unlikely to
collaborate on vacant land re-use, 3) relatively simple visual (but inherently spatial) interfaces allow for richer
discussion about constraints and possibilities on specific sites, and 4) the spatial program generated via gaming
show promise in leading to new and more robust methods of participatory design. These outcomes suggest a
new possible direction for vacant  land_use planning, in which serious gaming becomes a tool to engage
communities while, simultaneously, transforming decision-making norms and practices.
References
 Allison Plyer and Elaine Ortiz, Benchmarks for Blight: How Much Blight Does New Orleans Have?
(Greater New Orleans Community Data Center, August 21, 2012).
 Office of Community Development, “The Homeowner Assistance Program: Week 323 Situation &
Pipeline Report” (State of Louisiana, September 11, 2012).

Abstract Index #: 577
BEYOND AESTHETICS: FOSTERING PLACE ATTACHMENT THROUGH THE DESIGN REGULATORY PROCESS
Abstract System ID#: 1195
Individual Paper

GRUNNINGER BONNEY, Courtney [Clemson University] cgrunni@clemson.edu
Locally designated historic districts are a specific context due to the interaction between traditionally designed
areas, culturally significant places, and growing development opportunities. The increasing pace of revitalization
and development in these area can result in conflicts regarding new development due to the competing
interests of heritage (historical and cultural importance), preservation (preservation, renovation, and adaptive
use), and planning (economic development, revitalization). comminuty that have multiple cultural heritages,
such as Savannah, GA are particularly vulnerable to such conflicts as the preservation of one heritage can be done
to the detriment or exclusion of another (Graham, Ashworth, and Tunbridge, 2005). This can be complicated by
the use of regulatory design guidelines, which are developed based on physical architectural characteristics, and
are not necessarily equipped to incorporate cultural significance. To bridge this gap, place attachment, defined as
the feelings of bonding that occur between individuals and environments that are personally meaningful
(Scannell and Gifford, 2010), will be used as a mechanism for evaluating and measuring cultural and social
significance of the historic area and incorporating these factors into the design regulatory process.
This research, a single embedded case study design, explored the relationship between place attachment and the
design regulatory process within locally designated historic districts in Savannah, GA to address the primary
research question, “Can identifying, prioritizing, and integrating residents’ feelings of place attachment into the
design regulatory process ease the tensions between heritage, preservation, and planning by aiding comminuty
in developing consensus?” Data was collected using a web-based survey that measured participant’s levels of
place attachment, as well as opinions regarding the importance of specific architectural features and renovations
within the historic district. Additionally, 15 follow up interviews were conducted using a participant driven photo
elicitation strategy. The data was analyzed using a combination of statistical analysis, GIS mapping, and
qualitative analysis.
The results of this study are relevant for planners for several reasons. First, the research identified not only which
urban sites and structures highly valued by the community, but more importantly why they are significant. While
identified places might be important to different members of the community for different reasons, urban
planners and other decision makers can still establish consensus on the importance of preserving specific aspects
of the identified sites. Secondly, the results reveal specific architectural features that are critical to creating and
maintaining place attachment, which would allow for more targeted and precise design regulation. Finally, these
results can inform multiple aspects of preservation and planning practice, such as developing long-term
development strategies or broadening outreach campaigns. A deeper understanding of these issues could
influence development at the local level, as well as become integrated into regional and national level policy
and strategies.
References
 Scannell, L., & Gifford, R. (2010). Defining place attachment: A tripartite organizing framework. Journal
of environment Psychology, 30(1), 1-10.
 Graham, B., Ashworth, G.J., & Tunbridge, J.E. (2005). The uses and abuses of heritage. In G. Corsane
(Ed.), Heritage, Museums and Galleries. London: Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 578
LESS DEALMAKING AND MORE PLANNING, PRACTICE AFTER KOONTZ
Abstract System ID#: 1305
Individual Paper
RAWLINS, Rachael [University of Texas at Austin] rrawlins@austin.utexas.edu
Koontz v. St. Johns River Water Management District was a case involving wetlands mitigation. The developer
was offered the option of developing more of his site if he gave a monetary contribution for off- site mitigation. It
was just an option, and he declined. The government "took" nothing. Yet, he sued for a Taking and won. The

Supreme Court decided in his favor and the Florida state courts ultimately awarded "temporary taking" damages
and the right to develop the property free of the offensive condition. This paper explores the practical
consequences of the Kootz decision in the context of current planning practice and developing caselaw.
Before Koontz, not all courts allowed takings lawsuits where demands were for money, as opposed to property.
And, it wasn’t clear that you could bring suit when you didn’t submit to the demand. The claim in Koontz was
under a rule of takings law that puts the burden of proof on the government to demonstrate that mitigation
requested is related and roughly proportional to  impact created by the development. Planners need to be aware
that courts may now require more planning in contexts where planners have historically engaged in considerable
deal-making. Although the lawsuit was dismissed as premature, Seattle's density bonus program was recently
challenged.
Cities have developed many optional program to encourage sustainable development that include increased
development rights in exchange for favorable concessions. These optional program create "win-win" solutions,
but sometimes ask for concessions that are not closely related to  impact created by the development. Some
cities, for example, have allowed increases in density and height limitations in exchange for affordable housing
construction or "in lieu" fees without strictly adhering to an "essential nexis" and "rough proportionality"
analysis. Meeting this standard can be particularly difficult in the context of aesthetic or quality standards that
are not easily quantified.
The Supreme Court in Koontz said that the government need only offer one constitutionally viable option. Relying
on that language would suggest that there is no problem with optional density bonus program so long as the
underlying zoning is sound. However, the facts and reasoning in Koontz are problematic. The developer had the
option of developing a smaller portion of the site and there was no argument that option wasn't economically
viable. Yet, the Court reasoned that the availability of the option was irrelevant because it was not consistent
with the developers plan. Following this reasoning, if a developer "plans" to build in excess of standard zoning, it
is not clear that the fact of the underlying zoning will create a safe harbor from takings challenges.
There has been considerable confusion as to when to apply the "essential nexis" and "rough proportionality"
standards, but legislatively created standards are most likely to receive deferential review. Heightened scrutiny
has been justified where the context creates some reason not to trust the government. If the government is
asking for property, it may try to evade the "just compensation" requirement. However, many courts have
reasoned that legislatively created conditions are different because the political process provides an opportunity
for correction. It is much harder for the government to engage in "extortion" in the context of broadly applicable
requirements. Although this approach removes flexibility from the process, this paper concludes in favor of more
planning and less deal-making and makes suggestions for planning practice and legal reform.
References
 Koontz v. St. Johns River Water Mgmt. Dist., 133 S. Ct. 2586 (2013)
 Koontz Coalition v. City of Seattle, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 149593 (W.D. Wash. Oct. 20, 2014)
 Anna Minard, Developers Sue to Make Seattle More Developer-Friendly. They Call a Law Promoting
More Affordable Housing "Extortion," The Stranger, January 29, 2014
 See Ehrlich v. Culver City, 911 P. 2d 429 (Cal. 1996)
 See Mira Mar Development Corp. v. Coppell, 421 S.W. 3d 74 (5th Dist. 2013) (applying heightened
scrutiny "essential nexis" and "rough proportionality" analysis to engineering standards including rolled
curbs, a drainage pipe extension, and landscaping requirements where nothing was "taken" from the
developer)

Abstract Index #: 579
RESILIENCE PLANNING, DISASTER RECOVERY AND CONSERVATIVE VIEWS
Abstract System ID#: 1379
Individual Paper

TRAPENBERG FRICK, Karen [University of California, Berkeley] kfrick@berkeley.edu
Issues of resiliency have generated much recent attention in planning scholarship and practice with how city and
regions bounce back and endure after disasters and extreme events (Gasparini et al, 2014; Goldstein, 2012).
Planning and funding efforts can be blocked by conservative legislators and activists who question the role of
public funding and government, particularly at the federal level. Planning also can affect property rights and
property values when there are changes to local zoning and infrastructure projects are planned and implemented
(Jacobs, 2012).
Building from research on conservative activists opposition to planning (Trapenberg Frick, 2013, Whittemore,
2012), I explore conservative views on the role of government, property rights, infrastructure planning, and
public participation when planning for resilience and in the wake of recovery. The goal of the research is to find
areas of common ground from across the political spectrum to chart a way forward.
Literature related to resilience, Tea party and property rights activism, and communications/new media studies
guides the analysis. The research is based on content analysis of key documents and online sources, and in-depth
interviews with activists and elected officials across the United States from across the political spectrum. I look
specifically at the discourse and narratives surrounding federal emergency relief legislation and with a special
attention to Hurricane Sandy in 2012. Through these channels, I analyze the range of concerns and perceptions,
the role of technology and social media in disseminating messages and outcomes to date.
References
 Gasparini, P., Manfredi, G. and Asprone, D. (eds.) (2014) Resilience and Sustainability in Relation to
Natural Disasters: A Challenge for Future city. New York: Springer.
 Goldstein, B. E. (Ed.). (2012). Collaborative resilience: Moving through crisis to opportunity. MIT Press.
 Trapenberg Frick, K. (2013). The Actions of Discontent: Tea Party and Property Rights Activists Pushing
Back Against Regional Planning. Journal of the American Planning Association, 79(3), 190-200.
 Jacobs, H.M. (2012). Talking About Property Rights Over Tea: Discourse and Policy in the U.S. and
 Europe. In T. Hartmann and B. Needham (Eds.), Planning by law and property rights reconsidered (pp.
71-96). Surrey, England & Burlington, VT: Ashgate Publishing, Ltd.

Track 12: Planning Theory
Abstract Index #: 580
APPLYING HAWAIIAN ANCESTRAL KNOWLEDGE TO CONTEMPORARY PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 35
Individual Paper
FREITAS, Antoinette [University of Hawaii at Manoa] antoinet@hawaii.edu
The central theme addresses the ways in which societies can accommodate multiple epistemologies and
ontologies through  land_use planning. I utilize Indigenous planning as an entry point into this examination.
Specifically, I ask how do we apply Hawaiian ancestral knowledge about ʻāina (loosely translated as land) to
contemporary planning contexts in Hawaiʻi? By using Hawaiian ʻāina based public charter schools as a site of
planning inquiry, we may begin to understand how Hawaiian public charter schools, as nonprofit driven
institutions, articulate the ways in which ʻāina influences their ways of knowing and ways of being. In turn, I
apply those ways of knowing and being to a planning framework to create a space where Indigenous knowledge
can make a greater contribution to the field of planning.

The Hawaiian public charter school movement is an extension of the Hawaiian activist movement of the 1970’s.
The Hawaiian movement coalesced as aggressive pro-urban development policy were ushered in through the
Hawai’i state  land_use plan that was established in 1961. I will highlight how pro-urban development policy that
targeted rural Hawaiian comminuty such as Kalama valley on Oʻahu island served to galvanize Hawaiian
resistance through the philosophy of aloha ʻāina (love of the land) and mālama ʻāina (care for the land). I will
further illustrate how these two concepts have become fundamental pedagogical platforms for many ʻāina based
Hawaiian charter schools beginning in the 1980’s.
One of the unique markers of the charter school movement in Hawai'i is the presence of Hawaiian-focused public
charter schools. More than half of the charter schools in Hawaiʻi identify as a Hawaiian focused schools that tend
to be small scale, community based, and staffed by a large percentage of Hawaiian teachers. I draw upon key
findings from this qualitative research project to theorize an Indigenous planning framework that outlines 1) a
genealogy of knowing that is relationship based rather than economistic and 2) a utility of knowing that realigns
question framing and analysis that privileges the Indigenous point of view.
References
 Goodyear-Kaopua, J. N. (2013). The Seeds We Planted: Portraits of a Native Hawaiian Charter School. (p.
321). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
 Porter, L. (2010). Unlearning the Colonial Culture of Planning. Farnhma: Ashgate Publishing Ltd.
 Sandercock, L. (1998). Making the Invisible Visible : A Multicultural Planning History. Berkeley: University
of California.
 Walker, R. T. J. and D. N. (2013). Reclaiming Indigenous Planning. (D. Walker, R, Jojola, T. and Natcher,
Ed.). Montreal & Kingston: McGill-Queens University Press.
 Trask, H. (1987). The Birth of the Modern Hawaiian Movement. The Hawaiian Journal of History. Vol.
21.

Abstract Index #: 581
INFUSING JUSTICE WITH COMPASSION: A NEW ETHICAL APPROACH FOR PLANNERS?
Abstract System ID#: 43
Individual Paper
WHITE, Stacey [University of Kansas] sswhite@ku.edu, presenting author, primary author
LYLES, Ward [University of Kansas] wardlyles@ku.edu
In its aspirational principles, the American Institute of Certified Planners’ Code of Ethics reads:
“We shall seek social justice by working to expand choice and opportunity for all persons, recognizing a special
responsibility to plan for the needs of the disadvantaged and to promote racial and economic integration. We
shall urge the alteration of policy, institutions, and decisions that oppose such needs.” (AICP 2009, A.1.f)
Despite being a core principle of planning ethics, social justice often feels like an elusive imperative. What
planners ought to do and what they believe they are able to do are may diverge significantly. As divisive politics
push comminuty further apart, issues of fairness suffer from controversy or outright neglect. It is little surprise,
then, that equity, the third of the so-called “3 Es” of sustainability, has proven hardest to accomplish. But what is
missing from our efforts?
This paper examines theoretical concepts of compassion as a potential means to enhance and activate social
justice in planning practice. Although it may be argued that justice stems from compassion or concern for the
wellbeing of others, it is uncommon that the two concepts are explicitly linked. To explore potential connections
and mutual reinforcements, we will examine the ethical foundations of compassion in both philosophy and
religious traditions. We then compare these insights with key ethical theories in urban_planning, including
utilitarianism, deontology, and John Rawls’ theory of justice, which McConnell (1995, p. 33) considered as an
ethical theory *for* planning.

The second part of the paper examines recent research in neuroscience that has identified clear brain changes
and health benefits associated with compassionate practices such as meditation, mindfulness and prayer
(Davidson 2012; Newberg 2010). We will draw on findings from these neuro-scientific studies and consider their
potential relevance for planners. Our paper will develop a conceptual framework for incorporation of compassion
as a guiding principle of planning, including preliminary ideas as to how planning processes might use
compassionate practices as tools to advance the goal of social justice.
Accredited planning program must and do teach planning ethics, but lessons on the implementation of ethical
principles in practice are considerably more difficult to impart. A focus on compassion may provide a means as
well as an end and thereby elevate both planning education and planning practice.
References
 American Institute of Certified Planners Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. 2009. Online resource,
available at: https://www.planning.org/ethics/ethicscode.htm.
 Davidson, Richard J. 2012. The Emotional Life of Your Brain. London: Penguin Books.
 McConnell, Shean. 1995. “Rawlsian Planning Theory,” in Sue Hendler, ed. Planning Ethics: A Reader in
Planning Theory, Practice and Education, New Brunswick, NJ: Center for Urban Policy Research, pp. 3048.
 Newberg, Andrew. 2010. Principles of Neurotheology. London: Ashgate.

Abstract Index #: 582
PLANNING'S LEGITIMACY: EXPLORING AMARTYA SEN'S CONCEPTUALIZATION OF FREEDOM IN AFFIRMING THE
ROLE OF PLANNING AS ENABLING FREEDOMS
Abstract System ID#: 64
Individual Paper
RAJ, Subhashni [University at Buffalo, SUNY] subhashn@buffalo.edu
Over the decades planning has faced its fair share of scrutiny - internally and externally (Klosterman, 1985). The
external challenge to planning’s relevance and utility has for the most part been espoused by adherents of free
market economics, and planning’s validation has arisen from the failure of the free market to address wicked
problems (Rittel & Webber, 1973; Klosterman, 1985). This paper presents an alternative and additional rationale
for planning’s legitimacy – one that is embedded in Amartya Sen’s work on freedom. While planning discourse
has not paid much attention to the enhancement of freedoms, planning practice has engaged in restricting
individual freedoms - through zoning, comprehensive plans and local government action – but also in enabling
freedom when planning has worked to reduce spatial disparities and other injustices. Hence it is prudent for the
profession to reflect on how we as planners engage in the act of enabling and hindering freedoms, for as
demonstrated by Sen, the ideal of freedom holds many avenues for pursuing justice and equity. Drawing on the
philosophical underpinnings of freedom and the conceptualization of freedom developed by Sen, this paper
proposes that planning can in large part be turned into an enterprise committed to expanding freedoms afforded
to citizens.
Sen’s conceptualization of freedom expands over several decades and through multiple papers. In this paper I
present a cohesive and coherent understanding of freedom developed by Sen, weaving together the different
elements of this conceptualization covered in multiple publications. Sen offers a conception of freedom that is
embedded in equity, where systematic inequity is framed as unfreedoms that need to be removed to expand
individual liberties. Removing unfreedoms needs to be coupled with improving people’s capability sets by
increasing opportunities available to them. Capability sets reflect the freedom to lead multiple possible types of
life (Sen, 2008), which increases when substantive freedoms are made possible. Substantive freedoms are related
to the intrinsic role of freedom – ends of freedom – which include literacy, avoidance of malnutrition, escapable
morbidity and mortality to name a few. Therefore, to expand human freedoms, substantive freedoms must be

guaranteed which increases capability sets leading to increased opportunities that contribute towards alleviating
systemic injustices and inequities leading to expanded freedoms.
Planning in Sen’s conceptualization can be seen as securing substantive freedoms – for example by reducing
spatial disparities - that would inherently expand citizen’s capability sets, enabling them to achieve more. In
applying this framing of freedom, if then planning gives deference to reducing food insecurity, spatial disparities
or addressing other  land_use issues related tied to justice, planning is in effect helping to expand human liberties,
not infringing upon them. Sen’s conceptualization of freedom offers planning an opportunity to reassess and
realign priorities, to strengthen and enable an active citizenry, capable of fully participating in a functioning
democracy. This paper concludes that Sen’s conceptualization of freedom is conducive to planning in rearticulating a defense for itself that is embedded in enabling freedoms.
References
 Sen, Amartya. (1988). Freedom of choice: concept and content. European Economic Review, 32(2), 269294.
 Sen, Amartya. (1999). Development as freedom: Oxford University Press.
 Sen, Amartya. (2008). Capability andWell-Being. In M. Hausman, Daniel (Ed.), The Philosophy of
Economics: An Anthology (3rd ed., pp. 270-293). New York: Cambridge University Press.
 Klosterman, Richard E. (1985). Arguments for and against planning. Town planning review, 56(1), 5.
 Rittel, Horst WJ, & Webber, Melvin M. (1973). Dilemmas in a general theory of planning. Policy sciences,
4(2), 155-169.

Abstract Index #: 583
PLANNING IN THE FACE OF ETHICS
Abstract System ID#: 80
Individual Paper
LONG, Mellone [Clemson University] mellonl@g.clemson.edu, presenting author, primary author
LAURIA, Mickey [Clemson University] mlauria@clemson.edu
If planning is really spatial ethics as Robert Upton (2002) asserts, then what accounts for planners’ ethics? What
affects planners’ ethical decisions?
Planners face situations every day that they have to resolve in a professional, moral and ethical manner while
simultaneous attending to the political atmosphere where they work. Daniel Wueste says, “Ethical issues arise in
situations where action (or inaction) will have a significant impact on human well-being” (2005: 70). Actions that
influence human well-being are generally the types of challenges that planners face each day.
This research is significant to planners and the comminuty they work in. Planners, as most professionals, have a
code of ethics, the American Institute of Certified Planners (AICP) Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct. This
code can conflict with what the politicians and/or the community wants the planners’ role to be. Do planners use
their professional code of ethics? What contributes to a planner’s ethical decisions, why would they use the AICP
code of ethics? Is it their experience, their education or their knowledge of the code that directs their decisions?
Elizabeth Howe and Jerome Kaufman, albeit with a different purpose, performed a similar survey in 1979. Howe
and Kaufmann used ethical scenarios to determine planners’ roles; this research uses similar scenarios to
determine the ethical decisions that planners make. This current survey of planners can determine if planners
make decisions using the AICP code of ethics or not. There are many types of planners working in a variety of
contexts and a survey is a good way to gain insight into who is more likely to use the AICP code. Research on
ethics has been sparse and generally on ethical roles; this research is different because it evaluates the use of the
AICP code involved in planners’ choices.

This research uses a questionnaire to solicit planners’ responses to various ethical scenarios. Each scenario will
have five choices, one from the AICP rules of conduct, another from the AICP aspirations and the three remaining
choices outside of the AICP code. The independent variables are various proxies for level of experience: age,
years of service, position, education, and licenses/certification. Work context is a control variable. The survey is
a cross-sectional design web survey with thirty questions (mixed type: multiple choice, open ended). We are
seeking a large sample of planner responses (given a population of 37,750). Emails with a link to the web survey
will be sent to the entire American Planning Association (APA) membership. We are unable to do a random
sample therefore the demographic statistics from the respondents to the survey will be compared with the
parameters of the entire membership. This information will be used to see if the sample is representative or not
and to assist in interpretation of results. The results of the survey are used to analyze the effects of the various
proxies for reasons to make ethical choices.
Our practical experience suggests that planners are likely not to use the AICP code early in their work careers,
then they will use an AICP code soon after receiving their certification, but as time goes by will begin to rely more
on their experience to make decisions. This may lead them to construct other than AICP code. Whether or not
these expectations are realized, the findings will be useful in developing pedagogical approaches for planning
educators in the university, for AICP certification maintenance (CM) sessions at professional conferences, and for
considering revisions to the AICP code of ethics. Finally, our findings should suggest avenues for future research
in perhaps quasi-experimental treatments to be used in AICP CM workshops that would allow us to explore
causality more directly. These quasi-experimental results would feed back into university planning education,
professional certification maintenance sessions, and future AICP code of ethics evaluations.
References
 Howe, E., & Kaufman, J. (1979). The ethics of contemporary American planners. Journal of the American
Planning Association, 45(3), 243-255. doi:10.1080/01944367908976965
 Upton, R. (2002). Planning praxis: Ethics, values and theory. Town Planning Review, 73(3), 253-269.
doi:10.3828/tpr.73.3.2
 Wueste, Daniel E. (2005). A Philosophical Yet User-friendly Framework for Ethical Decision Making in
Critical Care Nursing. Dimensions of Critical Care Nursing, 4(2), 70-79.

Abstract Index #: 584
A POLITICAL ECOLOGY OF DESIGN: CONTESTED VISIONS OF URBAN CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION
Abstract System ID#: 123
Individual Paper
GOH, Kian [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] kiangoh@mit.edu
From the eastern seaboard of the United States to coastal city in Southeast Asia, severe weather events and
long-term climate  impact challenge how we live and work. As the debates over city, planning, and climate
change intensify, governments are proposing increasingly ambitious plans to respond to climate  impact. These
involve extensive reconfigurations of built and “natural” environments, and massive economic resources. They
promise “ecological security,” that is, safety from climate  impact, and the perpetuation of capitalist growth. Yet
they often involve intractable social questions, including decisions about how and what to protect on sites that
are home to already marginalized urban residents.
Scholarship on urban adaptation planning has tended to reinforce divisions between social and spatial, drawing a
line between engineered solutions and sociopolitical measures. It has also assumed urban politics to be
contained and cohesive, with large-set city surveys missing the real life politics on the ground, and in-depth case
studies underplaying broader links and processes. And it has relied on static conceptualizations of the city as a
bounded territory, neglecting interconnections across networks and associated processes of urbanization.
My paper, part of a broader study on the urban spatial politics of climate change adaptation, is posed as a
counterpoint to these dominant discussions. Exploring what I call a political ecology of design, I investigate sites

and strategies in three city, New York, Jakarta, and Rotterdam. Looking, on one level, at city and national
initiatives, including Rebuild By Design in New York, the “Great Garuda” sea wall plan in Jakarta, and Rotterdam
Climate Proof, my paper also searches out alternate narratives – the “counterplans” – including community
resiliency in Red Hook, Brooklyn, and grassroots design activism in the informal “kampungs” of Jakarta. I focus on
these contested visions, the interconnectedness of local and global relationships, and the role of design in urban
adaptation. I ask, in the face of climate change and uneven social and spatial urban development, how are
contesting visions of the future produced and how do they attain power?
I ground my research in theories of sociospatial power relationships – the social production of space (Lefebvre,
1991), urbanization and uneven development (Harvey, 1985; Smith, 1996), spatial justice (Soja, 2010), and the
geographies of policy mobility (Peck, 2011; Roy & Ong, 2011). I also look to theories of the interrelationships
between social, ecological, and technological processes in and through city (Bulkeley et al., 2011; Hodson &
Marvin, 2010). In essence a mixed methods, multiple case study, I combine semi-structured interviews with field
and participant observation, and spatial and visual methods. I build on frameworks for a more reflexive approach
to case selection and analysis (Burawoy, 2003; McMichael, 2000) and a relational reading of sites – each
understood through the others (Amin, 2004; Massey, 2011; Roy, 2009). In Ananya Roy’s words, “to view all city
from this particular place on the map.”
I find that, 1) in this new landscape of climate policy mobilities, urban adaptation projects, globally constituted,
reflect local urban sociospatial system, 2) climate change motivates relationships, but plan objectives often
transcend-climate specific goals, and 3) the production of alternative visions – “counterplans” – opens terrains of
contestation, enabling modes of organizing and resistance to hegemonic system. These findings emphasize the
agency of marginalized urban comminuty, the sociopolitical role of design, and the embeddedness of climate
change responses within multiple scales and levels of global urban development. They imply that planners
committed to equitable outcomes and invested in planning for climate change need to engage urban scales and
networks, learn from and contribute to political organizing and coalition building, and envision social and spatial
change together.
References
 Bulkeley, H., Castán Broto, V., Hodson, M., & Marvin, S. (Eds.). (2011). city and low carbon transitions.
Abingdon, Oxon ; New York, NY: Routledge.
 Hodson, M., & Marvin, S. (2010). World city and climate change: producing urban ecological security.
Maidenhead, U.K. ; New York: Open University Press.
 Lefebvre, H. (1991). The production of space. Oxford, UK ; Cambridge, Mass., USA: Blackwell.
 Roy, A., & Ong, A. (Eds.). (2011). Worlding city: Asian experiments and the art of being global.
Chichester, West Sussex ; Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
 Smith, N. (1984). Uneven development: nature, capital, and the production of space. New York, NY:
Blackwell.

Abstract Index #: 585
FIFTY YEARS ON: TOWARD A NEW PRESERVATION PLANNING FRAMEWORK
Abstract System ID#: 159
Individual Paper
LIVI SMITH, Andrea [University of Mary Washington] alsmith@umw.edu, presenting author
HADDEN-LOH, Tracy [Rails-to-Trails Conservancy] tracy@railstotrails.org, primary author
Preservation planning practice is at a crossroads. While preservation is firmly institutionalized in the United
States through the almost 50 year old National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, contemporary practitioners and
scholars have moved away from the originally ad-hoc nature of the profession, integrating architectural and
planning goals. Vivacious debates on the relevance, effectiveness, and normative outcomes of preservation as a
movement are playing out in the mainstream media and the groves of academe. As sustainability has become a
core concept in American urban_planning, preservationists have begun to grapple with what planning for the

future means when archiving the past. Are the past and the future fundamentally separate planning objects, or
can these goals be reconciled? Establishing preservation as a relevant and vital practice in the twenty-first
century means re-envisioning its very purpose. As the discipline has matured and the NHPA is reaching 50 years,
the time is ripe to advance preservation planning’s theoretical foundation. This paper argues that a new
conceptual framework of preservation must also engage sustainability: addressing the temporality of the built
environment and the elusiveness of historical truth in the framework of environment, economy, and equity. To
do so, we first discuss the widening scope of preservation and the way it has worked with - and sometimes
against - sustainability in the past. Next we reinterpret the 3Es within a new conceptual framework of cultural
sustainability. Finally, though targeted case studies, we explain how practitioners can use this new framework to
more effectively plan for the future while honoring the past.
References
 Nasser, Noha (2003) Planning for Urban Heritage Places: Reconciling Conservation, Tourism, and
Sustainable Development. Journal of Planning Literature, 17(4):467-479
 Darlow, Alison (1996) Cultural Policy and Urban Sustainability: making a missing link? Planning Practice
and Research. 11(3):291-301
 Jones, Diana (2011) The City of the Dead: The Place of Cultural Identity and environment Sustainability
in the African-American Cemetery. Landscape Journal. 30:2-11
 Young, Robert A. (2012) Stewardship of the Built Environment: Sustainability, Preservation, and Reuse.
Washington, DC: Island Press

Abstract Index #: 586
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND THE STRUGGLE FOR CO-EXISTENCE IN PLANNING: AGONISM AS A DECOLONIZING
PRAXIS?
Abstract System ID#: 170
Individual Paper
BARRY, Janice [University of Manitoba] janice.barry@umanitoba.ca, presenting author
PORTER, Libby [RMIT University] libby.porter@rmit.edu.au, primary author
Discussion about Indigenous peoples in planning is now gaining traction in the field, to such an extent that at
least some of that discussion now centres on the question of how to begin decolonizing planning theory and
practice (e.g. Porter 2010; Howitt and Lunkapis 2010; Sandercock and Attili 2013; Ugarte 2014). While
considerable effort has gone into the critique that underpins calls for decolonizing planning, we have not
sufficiently grappled with the conceptual, empirical and practical tools that might be needed. This paper engages
with these critical issues and draws upon thinking presented in the final chapter of our forthcoming book,
Planning for Co-existence? (Ashgate). Our book seeks to advance conceptual and practical understanding of
Indigenous peoples’ struggles for co-existence in planning: the struggle to “share space” (Howitt & Lunkapis
2010) but also to (re)create space for the expression of distinct cultural identities (Porter 2013). The book
highlights the stories of four Indigenous nations - two Canada and two Australia – who are struggling for coexistence in the face of rapid urban and/or natural resource development.
This paper frames these stories as examples of agonistic practice (Mouffe 2003, 2005; Bond 2011; Hillier 2003;
Ploger 2004) that unsettle planning in these places. Our case stories reveal the complicated ways Indigenous
people engage in planning: ways that often deliberately circumvent formal planning processes (legal action and
physical blockades being two examples) in order to expose and resist the persistent power of colonial (white)
privilege and to create space for the resurgence of Indigenous ways of being, acting and knowing. Even when
these expressions of Indigenous agency are enacted within formal planning processes, our cases reveal that it is
doing much, much more that simply moving towards collaborative planning solutions. Indigenous peoples are
actively ‘unsettling’ the very idea of planning. As several critical Indigenous theorists note, such acts of
unsettlement is absolutely central to radical theories of decolonization (see, for example: Tuck & Yang 2012). We
see theories of agonism and agonistic planning as effective tools for better understanding the ongoing work of
unsettlement. They not only identify and respect the plural and often incommensurate lifeways and values that

shape (post)colonial planning contexts around the globe, but these theories also see conflict and struggle as
essential to the negotiation of some sort of co-existence. It is through conflict and struggle that hegemonic ideas
about the desired processes and outcomes of planning become unsettled and new ways of co-existing with
Indigenous peoples can begin to emerge.
These stories, then, have much to teach us about the ways in which Indigenous peoples are already engaged with
planning, and thus help develop more precise conceptual and practical ideas for how to contribute to a
decolonization of planning. By drawing together the current literature on agonistic planning and then connecting
it to the politics of recognition, this paper presents a more critical framing of how planning ought to respond to
different identity positions: one that embraces the role of conflict and that frames such political passion and
struggle as key elements of counter-hegemonic planning practice.
References
 Bond, S (2011).Negotiating a ‘democratic ethos’: moving beyond the agonistic–communicative divide.
Planning Theory, 10(2): 161-186
 Howitt, R & GJ Lunkapis (2010) Coexistence: Planning and the challenge of Indigenous Rights in J Hillier &
P Healey (Eds) The Ashgate Research Companion to Planning Theory: Conceptual Challenges for Spatial
Planning, Farnham: Ashgate.
 Mouffe, C (2005) On The Political, London: Routledge.
 Porter, L (2010) Unlearning the Colonial Cultures of Planning. Surrey, UK: Ashgate
 Tuck, E. & KW Yang (2012) Decolonization is not a metaphor. Decolonization: Indigeneity, Education &
Society, 1(1): 1-40.

Abstract Index #: 587
SOCIAL INNOVATION THROUGH TRANSLATION: AN ACTOR NETWORK THEORY CASE STUDY OF FIVE GRANTING
AGENCIES COLLABORATING IN BRITISH COLUMBIA.
Abstract System ID#: 242
Pre-organized Session: Planning Theory and the New Materialism
TATE, Laura [Community Action Initiative] ltate@communityactioninitiative.ca
A range of social actors have adopted new initiatives couched in social innovation rhetoric; but to move beyond
the rhetoric into concerted, meaningful action can take time, effort and a significant shift in how agencies
conduct their core business. This has certainly been the case for various grant-making agencies focused in
Vancouver and the Province of British Columbia that provide non-profit and Aboriginal agencies with grants to
enable various socially beneficial activities in comminuty, ranging from the development of a next generation
urban food security system to a block-by-block strengths focused neighbourhood outreach program. And, it can
be both challenging and rewarding when those same agencies, with different organizational cultures, different
organizational goals, and serving different geographies assemble to promote social innovation.
This case study describes one such effort by five funders through a shared training and granting initiative by the
Vancouver Foundation, Community Action Initiative, City of Vancouver, First Nations Health Authority, and
Vancouver Coastal Health Authority, which took place from Summer 2014 through to Spring 2015, and was
independently evaluated. The case provides several robust illustrations of the actor network theory concept of
translation, using several dimensions. First, it shows how translation has been used to create equivalencies
(Callon, 1980; Latour, 2007) between agencies serving different geographies and mandates – a task which
produced a formal letter of agreement (LOA) signed by each of the agencies, and articulated these equivalencies
in a relatively complex albeit transparent manner. Second, it focuses on the performative dimension of the
translation work (Brown and Capdevila, 1999, drawing from Serres), recognizing that the interpretations and
actions of the agencies involved in the partnership were critical in breathing life into the LOA and the interagency
network itself. Related to this performative dimension was a shared learning component, wherein each of the
agencies had to come to a shared agreement on what constituted social innovation, because the latter formed
core component of the training and granting project, and was facilitated by an external trainer with nationally-

renowned expertise within Canada on social innovation. (In essence, each of the agencies was called upon to
learn about a new approach to social innovation and perform that approach in its collaborative selection of
recipients of a special training and small grant opportunity.) Third, it also draws on the notion of metaphor which,
while not explored within the ANT literature, comes from the complementary scholarship Dvora Yanow.
Metaphors share translation’s goal of building common understanding between people, but specifically achieve
this end by placing two opposite ideas together in ways that generate a new idea (2000:42). Where actors within
a network can contrast ideas from their own experience with the experience of members of those in another
group (e.g. where one actor can walk another how a key aspect of his agency’s granting process may contrast
with that other agency’s), those actors’ potential ability to support applied innovation within the network
increases. Finally, the case also explores how trust among network actors facilitated the translation process (see
Murphy, 2006), drawing from a combination of prior relationships in different contexts among some of the key
players and some overlapping network memberships.
References
 Latour, Bruno. (2007). Reassembling the Social. An introduction to Actor-Network Theory. Oxford
University Press: Oxford.
 Brown, Steven D. and Rose Capdevila. 1999. Perpetuum movile: substance, force and the sociology of
translation. in J. Law and J. Hassard (eds). Actor Network Theory and After. Oxford and Malden, MA:
Blackwell Publishing.
 Yanow, Dvora. (2000). Conducting interpretive policy analysis. Thousand Oaks, London and New Delhi:
Sage Publishing
 Beauregard, R. (2012). In search of assemblages. Crios. 4:9-16.

Abstract Index #: 588
PLANNING THEORY AND THE NEW MATERIALISM
Abstract System ID#: 219
Pre-organized Session: Planning Theory and the New Materialism
LIETO, Laura [Federico II University of Naples] lieto@unina.it, presenting author, primary author
BEAUREGARD, Robert [Columbia University] rab48@columbia.edu
TATE, Laura [British Columbia Community Action Initiative] ltate@communityactioninitiative.ca
WEBER, Rachel [UIC] rachelw@uic.edu
RYDIN, Yvonne [University College London] Y.Rydin@ucl.ac.uk
Things, rule-making and planning in the material city
One of the main contributions of actor-network theory (Latour, 2005) and assemblage (Beauregard, 2012) to
planning is a different understanding of urban materiality, no more regarded as the passive background of urban
life, but as a site of power, the locus where the social, technical, political, and economic come together as a
“relational processuality of composition” (McFarlane, 2011, p. 652). The material city thus represents a field of
possibilities for a networked form of contemporary citizenship to arise throughout relations between humans,
non humans and things.
To acknowledge the political role of materiality we need, preliminarily, to acknowledge the limits that planning
has traditionally imposed over things, the specific ways and forms by which it has reduced the inanimate world to
a disembodied voice.
One of the ways that the world is disembodied occurs when the formal/informal relation is structured as a
normative divide with the formality as the power meta-language driving the definition of what is outside its
jurisdiction – informality (Lieto and Beauregard, 2013). Many sites, things, and objects play a role in how political
subjectivities are achieved and performed in the contemporary city, but their heterogeneous and fluid materiality
may escape the normalizing grip of planning as a state action with coercive powers. Consequently, these sites,
things, and objects are typically relegated to the realm of the informal, whatever the consequences (e.g., eviction
and demolition of informal settlements or the legal entitling of land).

The paper essentially deals with formality, and takes rule-making as one of its relevant constituencies in the
planning field. Reference standards, ground rules and coordination schemes are the main variations of such a
constituency as well as distinctive features of plans and policy. Through examples of informal practices related
to formal planning issues in Napoli and New York City, the paper provides evidence concerning how formal rules
deal with the material city in order to gain legal and social effectiveness, how rule-making ‘comes to matter’ by a
selective process of abstraction and generalization, stripping matter of its heterogeneity and contingency
(Lezaun, 2012), and what happens ‘on the ground’ of everyday practices when a formal rule enters the material
world.
The paper’s claim is that things have politics (Latour, 2004): like words, they matter beyond their physical
consistency and apparent inertia, provided that planners are willing to blur the boundaries between formality
and informality, inspired by a relational idea of materiality, and reconcile both categories within the same
conceptual frame inspired by actor-network theory and assemblage thinking.
References
 Beauregard, R.A. 2012. In search of assemblages. CRIOS 4:9-17.
 Latour, B. 2005. Re-assembling the social. Oxford: Oxford University Press
 Latour, B. 2004. Which politics for which artifacts?. Domus. Available: http://www.sts-biu.org.
 Lieto, L. and R. Beauregard. 2013. Planning for a material world. CRIOS 6:11-20.
 Lezaun, J. 2012. The pragmatic sanction of materials. Notes for an ethnography of legal substances.
Journal of Law and Society 39 (1): 20-38.

Abstract Index #: 589
TOWARDS A NEO-STRUCTURAL METHODOLOGY FOR URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT ANALYSIS
Abstract System ID#: 246
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session
SONN, Jung Won [University College London] j.sonn@ucl.ac.uk
POTTER, Cuz [Korea University] cuzpotter@korea.ac.kr
MOULAERT, Frank [University of Leuven, ASRO] frank.moulaert@asro.kuleuven.be
MARTINELLI, Flavia [Universita' Mediterranea di Reggio Calabria] fmartinelli@unirc.it
In this session, we discuss Professor Frank Moulaert, Professor Flavia Martinelli and Professor Andreas Novy and
their colleagues’ proposal for a new DEMOLOGOS methodology in urban and regional analysis. The acronym
DEMOLOGOS stands for Development Models and Logics of Socio-economic Organization in Space.
Current mainstream methodologies for the analysis of socio-economic development in space and time have
problems addressing the connections between different themes of development, types of explanation, the role
of history and the links between different geographical perspectives and scales.
The DEMOLOGOS methodology finds its theoretical basis in different contributions from, among others, ‘old’
institutionalism, regulation theory, cultural political economy, radical geography, and critical planning literature.
These theories taken together valorize the memory of more than two centuries of historical and spatial analysis
and allow to develop a multi-dimensional operational mode of scientific investigation for the analysis of different
urban and regional trajectories.
Significant components of this methodology are:
Thematics inspired and conceptualized by use of the theoretical legacy, with a contemporary turn, are
developed and used to organize the analysis of structural transformation, institutional change, strategic agency
and socio-cultural development in city and regions. Each thematic takes on board its inherent contradictions,
especially the thematic Development Past Present Future that embodies the tensions between development as a
material trajectory and development as change agency. Other thematics are: Agency, Structure, Institutions and

Discourse (ASID); Culture, Discourse, Ideology and Hegemony (CDIH); Capital, Class and Form (CCF); Regulation,
Reproduction and Governance (RRG).
Themes that are relevant to the individual urban and regional trajectories are also selected within the
DELOMOGOS reading of spatial development: Views of Development; Democracy and Authoritarianism; Equality
and inclusion vs. Polarization and Exclusion; Crisis and Change. Thematics are then used to build a metatheoretical framework that is used to ‘lead’ the different case-studies. Depending on the development themes
selected in the study, some thematics will be privileged over others in the meta-theoretical framework. For
example, the investigation of the role of discourse in the definition of innovation policy in a given regional
system, will privilege a combination of ASID and CDIH to build its meta-theoretical framework.
Guided by this meta-frame the analysis of each urban and regional trajectory involves the study of:
change and spatio-temporal fixes (periodization, space-time emblematic moments); inter-scalar dynamics of
agency, structures and institutions; institutional dynamics (innovation and transformation, regulation and
deregulation, institutional discourses, …); the role of power as a social relation (control of resources, the strategic
material and discursive selectivity of forms, institutions, organizations, and interpersonal relations, the structuralinstitutional dynamics of hegemonic and counter-hegemonic forces); discourse analysis.
Dialectical reflections on the contradictions and spaces for action between hegemonic and alternative
development strategies, i.e. the potential for path-braking and path- shaping are an important final focus of the
methodology.
Two of the authors will speak at this panel. Prof. Moulaert will explain the methodology, while Prof. Martinelli
will explain how the methodology was applied to some of the case studies contained in the book.
References
 Martinelli, F., F. Moulaert and A. Novy (eds.) 2013 Urban and Regional Development Trajectories in
Contemporary Capitalism. Routledge

Abstract Index #: 590
NEGOTIATING GOVERNANCE AND PLANNING IN AUTHORITARIAN REGIME
Abstract System ID#: 265
Individual Paper
SHEN, Qianqi [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] qshen@ejb.rutgers.edu
In the discipline of planning, international development usually means planning in a state of authoritarian nature
or, at least, in an environment with minimum meaningful public participation. As discussed by Zhang (2000)
regarding challenges of Chinese planners, a main challenge was “planning as a government function has to follow
government leaders, but how to ‘tell the truth to power’ and rectify consequences of wrong decisions made by
the power?” This is still the biggest challenge for planners today in China and other countries of authoritarian
regime. When planners are faced with limited information resources based on which they can form opinions, as
well as limited exits they can publicize their opinions, planning practices are predictable and inevitably reduced to
acclamation.
This paper draws from my case studies on the development paths of Special Economic Zones in China, in which I
studied how inter-governmental negotiation—explicitly through open communication and interactions and
implicitly through non-compliance, rule violation, or other tacit strategies—works as a key mechanism to
engender development strategies that bring about different paths of development was examined. Specifically in
this paper, I focus on exploring planners and planning’s roles in these bargaining processes: who shapes
economic development plans and do public planners have the autonomy they need? What planning and planners
can do when meaningful public participation is absent?

In his recent work “The Kingdom and the Glory,” Agamben demonstrated how early Christian theology became
the paradigm of current economics and government (Agamben, 2007 and 2011). Agamben argued that these two
political paradigms from Christian theology shadow the contemporary paradigms of sovereignty and economic
government. They also shadowed the paradigms of absolutism and democracy, which actually originated from
the same source. By investigating how economy entered into Christian theology as the by-product of Trinity,
what Agamben actually showed was the inseparability of the seeming conflicting poles, which rely on and
coordinate with each other in a “bipolar governance machine” (Agamben, 2011). The two powers coexist and
oscillate in one machine, even though sometimes one pole may be dominant.
Following this argument, I then apply Agamben’s concepts of acclamation and inoperativity to develop my ideas
on what roles planners and planning play in an authoritarian regime. I then go on and argue for the new
directions of planning and planners should take in authoritarian regime and developing countries of authoritarian
regime.
References
 Agamben, G. (2011). The Kingdom and the Glory.
 Banerjee T and Chakravorty S (1994) Transfer of Planning Technology and Local Political Economy: A
Retrospective Analysis of Calcutta's Planning/ Journal of the American Planning Association 60 (1): 7182.
 Davidoff, P. (1965). Advocacy and puralism in planning. Journal of the American Institute of Planners,
31(4). doi:10.1080/01944366508978187
 Zhang, T. (2002). Challenges Facing Chinese Planners in Transitional China. Journal of Planning Education
and Research, 22, 64–76. doi:10.1177/0739456X0202200106
 Yiftachel O Essay: Re-engaging Planning Theory? Towards South-Eastern' Perspectives. Planning Theory,
5 (2006): 211-222.

Abstract Index #: 591
ASSESSING THE BLACK-BOX OF TRANSPORTATION MODELING: MAKING EVERYDAY TRAVEL EXPERIENCES
MATTER
Abstract System ID#: 270
Individual Paper
NOSTIKASARI, Dian [University of Texas at Arlington] dian.nostikasari@mavs.uta.edu
A black box settles contested knowledge into a number of specific assumptions, mathematical equations, and
computer programming (Latour and Woolgar 1986). The black-boxing of contested knowledge into a
transportation model is a process of establishing validity, thus dominance, over issues such as determining future
transportation needs. Considering that the use of modeling and public participation are two of the most
fundamental elements in long-term regional transportation planning, the black-boxing of issues into the
transport model presents challenges for inclusion of public input. The dominance of experts knowledge signifies
the continued need for inclusion of experience-based knowledge in the co-production of knowledge for planning
practices (Friedmann 2011).
This research addresses the questions of what is at stake when experts’ knowledge dominates and exercises
disciplinary power on everyday travel experiences; and how subjugated, experience-based knowledge can be
included into the regional transportation planning and modeling practices. Data have been collected from travel
diaries of participants from three city in the Dallas-Fort Worth (DFW) Metropolitan Area using Global
Positioning System (GPS) recorders, self-written travel diaries, and photographs; interviews with participants,
transportation planners, and modelers; and review of planning documents. Mixed methods of discourse analysis
and spatial analysis in GIS is used to demonstrate how applications of neoclassical economic results in particular
spatial layouts that constrains participants to travel according to terms of the ‘rational man’ (e.g. Rogalsky 2010).
The paper aims to delineate area where disciplinary power is exercised and where might resistances (Foucault

1980), as the collective struggle of subjugated knowledge in everyday travel experiences, be included within the
transport discourse.
The findings demonstrate that the transportation modeling process is a discursive practice—wherein its
assumptions produce outcomes—as shown in the disparity in travel distance and moving time from participants’
travel diaries. The travel diaries show that in average, participants from lower income households travel further
and longer to reach their destinations, compared to participants from higher income households. For
participants, resistances take the form of daily travel decisions like trip-chaining and carpooling. Collectively,
these daily decisions can alter the way planners think about future travel demands when engaging with the
transportation modeling process. For planners, resistances take the form of selective representation and
deliberative practices when validating outputs from transportation model. Understanding the transportation
modeling process as a discursive practice, and identifying resistances to disciplinary power, provide openings for
praxis in inclusive regional transportation planning. Public outreach and engagement efforts can focus more on
including everyday travel experiences rather than insisting on public meetings. Additionally, the paper
contributes to potentials of technology to be used in the co-production of knowledge about future transportation
needs rather than inhibit meaningful participation.
References
 Foucault, Michel. 1980. Power/knowledge : Selected Interviews and Other Writings, 1972-1977. Gordon
Collin. ed. New York: Pantheon Books.
 Friedmann, John. 2011. “The Epistomology of Social Practice.” In Insurgencies: Essays in Planning Theory,
29–50. New York: Routledge.
 Latour, Bruno, and Steve Woolgar. 1986. Laboratory Life : The Construction of Scientific Facts. Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press.
 Rogalsky, Jennifer. 2010. “The Working Poor and What GIS Reveals about the Possibilities of Public
Transit.” Journal of transportation Geography 18 (2): 226–37.

Abstract Index #: 592
PERFORMING PROPERTY CYCLES: HOW ACTOR NETWORKS TURNED A BOOM INTO A BUBBLE
Abstract System ID#: 288
Pre-organized Session: Planning Theory and the New Materialism
WEBER, Rachel [University of Illinois at Chicago] rachelw@uic.edu
Economists characterize fluctuations in property markets as “cyclical” in that characteristics repeat and recur
instead of being isolated or random. Like the general business cycle, these periods typically have four parts -- an
expansion, a slowdown, a downturn, and a recovery -- and are represented as short- or long-wave oscillations.
Starting with Wesley Mitchell and Homer Hoyt in the 1920s and 1930s, economists have tried to empirically
measure the length, frequency, peak, trough, amplitude, and speed of these cycles and to search for explanations
for them.
I argue that, despite its utility, the metaphor of a construction cycle naturalizes change and distracts us from the
social relations underpinning movement and transformation in property markets. In contrast I take an
institutional approach rooted in the actor-network theory that exposes how social constructs, market devices,
and political interventions help keep property capital in motion. During ten years of ethnographic field work in
Chicago’s commercial real estate sector, I identified a set of local professional practices that were critical to that
city’s Millennial construction boom (roughly 1998-2008). Actors - particularly brokers, appraisers, financial and
market analysts and planners - helped move capital through the built environment, articulating arguments for its
free passage, identifying inflexion points, and temporarily stabilizing meanings associated with individual
buildings, submarkets, and periods. These professionals engaged in meaning-making work by adopting
classificatory schema such as “Class A, B and C” and assigning values to make buildings into calculable and legible
assets. I argue that their techniques for classifying property were neither representations of “real” qualities nor
smokescreens for capital accumulation, but actively operated to make possible the stakes, dispositions and

values of their own professions. These techniques also shaped and formatted the markets they ostensibly
described.
Although they worked in different sectors and through different media (affect, regulation, technical expertise),
each of the professional groups I studied reinforced the others’ work though repeated transactions and
dependence on the each other for the successful execution of their contractual commitments. For example,
property values appreciated as a result of the recursive feedback of different professionals across the industry
acting on comparable hunches at roughly the same time. Norm followers were rewarded by this “mimetic
rationality” with higher commissions, tax revenues, and investment returns. Incentives to herd and collude
reinforced mutually consistent narratives of when markets are cresting and waning. Their coordinated calculative
behaviors attracted other members of the industry to and away from similar properties and submarkets at
roughly the same time, performing cycles.
References
 Michel Callon, Cécile Méadel, and Vololona Rabeharisoa. "The economy of qualities." Economy and
Society 31, no. 2 (2002): 194-217, 203.
 Bruce Carruthers and Arthur Stinchcombe "The social structure of liquidity: Flexibility, markets, and
states." Theory and Society 28, no. 3 (1999): 353-382
 Donald MacKenzie, "Social connectivities in global financial markets." Environment and Planning D 22.1
(2004): 83-102
 Donald MacKenzie, Fabian Muniesa, and Lucia Siu, eds. Do Economists Make Markets? On The
Performativity of Economics (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007).
 Janet Roitman, Anti-crisis (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2013).

Abstract Index #: 593
UNEVEN ACCESSIBILITY: DWORKIN'S PERSPECTIVE
Abstract System ID#: 311
Individual Paper
MARTENS, Karel [Radboud University Nijmegen] k.martens@fm.ru.nl
In Sovereign Virtue, Dworkin (2000) develops a theory of justice that puts competition over resources at its core.
Dworkin proposes to use resources, rather than primary goods (Rawls 1971) or capabilities (Sen and Nussbaum),
as the proper metric of fairness. He conceptualizes resources as the sum of material resources owned privately
by individuals. A society is fair, according to Dworkin, if an equal amount of resources is devoted to each person’s
life. In Dworkin’s approach, people insure themselves for bad luck. This includes disabilities, ill health, and lack of
talents. Through insurance schemes, it is possible to determine whether people, if given equal resources, would
be willing to set part of that resources aside to limit the bad luck which a person might encounter in life. This
‘willingness to insure’ is then seen as the indicator for the means that should be set aside in a real society
through taxation, to assist people that befall this bad luck. In the paper, I will apply the Dworkian approach to the
domain of transportation. I will do so through a set of abstract examples, in which people can insure themselves
for lack of transportation opportunities that might befall them because of various situations. I will end with
conclusions regarding fairness in the domain of transportation.
References
 Dworkin, R. (2000). Sovereign virtue: the theory and practice of equality. Cambridge/London, Harvard
University Press.
 Rawls, J. (1971). A theory of justice. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.
 Sen, A. K. (2011). Development as freedom. New York, Anchor Books.
 Nussbaum, M. C. (2000). Women and Human Development: The Capabilities Approach. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.
 Martens, K. (2012). "Justice in transportation as justice in access: applying Walzer's 'Spheres of Justice' to the
transport sector." Transportation 39(6): 1035-1053.

Abstract Index #: 594
PLANNING AS ACTION: QUESTIONS OF BETTER REQUIRE BETTER ETHICAL QUESTIONS
Abstract System ID#: 336
Individual Paper
CAMPBELL, Heather [University of Sheffield] h.j.campbell@shef.ac.uk
Actions, including reasoned non-actions, are fundamental to planning. Planning without the associated
implication, even obligation, to affect change in the world becomes hollow and meaningless. In John
Friedmann’s words “Planning that changes nothing of substance is scarcely worth talking about.” (1987, p. 44).
Considerable insights have resulted from research which has sought to assess the benefits and failings of
particular policy initiatives and to explain, inevitably retrospectively, why such decisions were made. But, by
contrast, much less attention has been focused on what is actually involved in taking and implementing actions in
the messy world of the here and now. Our purpose in this paper is to take the imperative to act as our starting
point. We therefore seek to explore the theoretical and practical implications of placing action centre stage.
Key to our argument is the assumption that the practices of doing and acting have very different qualities to the
practices of observing or analysing planning activities. We do not claim particular originality for taking action as
our starting point, but we are concerned that what is involved in acting in real time has received relatively limited
considered focus in the planning literature. The huge challenge that then presents itself is how to write about
real time action, other than from the remote and privileged position of an ex post facto observer. The somewhat
unusual, although not unique, quality of this paper is that it is jointly authored by an academic and a practitioner.
The resulting paper therefore should be viewed as a conversation between the worlds of research and practice.
The paper explores action in planning, not as a phenomenon to be observed from the outside after the action has
been taken, but to be considered from the inside at the point of acting. The argument first considers how to
write about action before in the remaining three sections focusing on what rigour means in relation to action
from the perspective of practice, then examines how far this differs from how action has been understood within
the planning literature, and finally exploring the resulting lessons and implications for the theory and practice of
planning.
The conclusions are necessarily tentative but suggest that action has very different qualities if it is considered
from the perspective of doing, rather than being the subject of observation. Understanding planning as action (in
real time), at the very least brings a new dimension to existing debates, and therefore has substantial
implications for practice, theory, research and education.
References
 Campbell, H., 2012, Planning to change the world: between knowledge and action lies synthesis. Journal
of Planning Education and Research, 32(2), pp.135-146.
 Campbell, H. 2012, “Planning ethics” and rediscovering the idea of planning, Planning Theory, 11(4), pp.
379-399.
 Friedmann, J. (1987). Planning in the Public Domain: From Knowledge to Action. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
 Rittel, H. and Webber, M., 1973, Dilemmas in a general theory of planning. Policy Studies, 4(2), pp.155169.

Abstract Index #: 595
UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS IN NEW CONTEXTS - POLICY MOBILITIES, ASSEMBLAGE AND MEANING IN WEST
DALLAS
Abstract System ID#: 353
Individual Paper

BEGGS, Wayne [University of Texas at Arlington] wayne.beggs@mavs.uta.edu
Policy transfer, a longtime focus for political science researchers, is the conceptualization of how policy move
between governments. (Khirhan et al, 2013; Clarke, 2012; McCann, 2011; Peck, 2011; McCann & Ward, 2010;
Peck & Theodore, 2010). More recently, geographers have infused policy transfer literature with consideration
of sites and locational dynamics spawning a new theory policy mobilities (McCann, 2011; Peck, 2011). Policy
mobilities are the fast exchange of ideas between city where policy entrepreneurs bring new approaches to
innovation seeking city (McCann, 2011). The purpose of this paper is to provide insight into policy mobilities
and how innovations land in new contexts. Understanding policy mobilities is important in a neo-liberal and
globalized context, where city with limited resources, compete with each other for talent and investment.
Rather than providing off-the-shelf solutions, policy mobilities represent contingent assemblages of solutions,
crafted for new contexts (McCann & Ward, 2012; McCann, 2011.2). Assemblage is a useful concept through
which to consider material manifestations of policy mobilities. Urban assemblage considers the city as a multiple
enactment which is simultaneously material (physical), actual (understood) and assembled as well as emergent,
processual and the multiple” (Farias, 2010). The concept of assemblage allows for the simultaneity of
experiences of spaces to shape meaning. Each newly introduced element, or action is placed or performed in
and shaped by existing contexts and is contingent on various factors, including the participants and their
individual perceptions. (McCann & Ward, 2012; Healy, 2011; McCann, 2011). policy are inserted into new
locations, are blocked, or mutate into new forms of hybridized innovation (McCann, 2011) which may
reverberate beyond intended zones of impact, shifting development and community expectations (McCann &
Ward, 2012). While current literature documents the occurrence of policy mobilities, research investigating how
mobilities are received and mutate is lacking (McCann, 2011).
Vancouver’s extrospective stance advancing a brand of sustainable urbanism has made it recognized a center of
policy innovation (Khirhan et al, 2013; McCann, 2013; McCann, 2011). West Dallas Dream (WDD) was a 2009
urban_planning visioning exercise utilizing transactive and communicative planning methods. It was delivered by
former Vancouver Co-director of Planning, Larry Beasley and aimed to “do Dallas planning differently” (Brown,
personal communication, 2014). Breaking from a history of top-down planning methodologies (Graff, 2008),
WDD sought to empower citizens of this poor inner-city Dallas neighborhood, while developing a vision to
catalyze and shape new development (Brown, personal communication, 2014).
Through the frame of policy assemblage, utilizing a single-case study methodology, this paper considers the
perceptions of the physical material assemblage of new spaces advanced through WDD. To understand how the
community interprets the changes resulting from WDD, interviews will be conducted with WDD process
participants and with randomized citizens at key sites in West Dallas. The intention is to better understand how
material manifestations of policy propagated for use in one context are perceived and interpreted in a very
different context. This study will increase our understanding of policy mobilities as a concept describing the
movement of policy from one context to another.
References
 McCann, E. (2011). Urban Policy Mobilities and Global Circuits of Knowledge: Towards a Research
Agenda. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 101 (1) 2011. (Pp. 107-130).
 Peck, J. (2011). Geographies of policy: From transfer-diffusion to mobility-mutation. Progress in Human
Geography 35(6). (Pp. 773-797).
 Graff, H. (2008). The Dallas myth: The making and unmaking of an American city. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
 McCann, E. (2013). Policy Boosterism, Policy Mobilities, and the Extrospective City. Urban Geography
34: 1. (pp. 5-29).
 Peck, J. & N. Theodore. (2010). Mobilizing Policy: Models, Methods and Mutations. Geoforum 41. (Pp.
169-174).

Abstract Index #: 596
PLANNING WITH HALF A MIND: WHY PLANNERS RESIST FEELING
Abstract System ID#: 367
Individual Paper
BAUM, Howell [University of Maryland] hbaum@umd.edu
The rational planning model has been challenged empirically and logically, but most planners still hold some
version of it. A central attraction of the model is that it assumes away the reality that people think and act
emotionally, often unconsciously. It simplifies planning by portraying people as rational actors, hence
understandable, predictable, and manageable, and it reassures planners that they themselves are rational
analysts, hence not subject to bias or loss of perspective or control.
The paper analyzes planners’ attraction to the rational model by exploring planners’ beliefs about the mind. The
first section examines three planning assumptions about rationality: (1) that planners should understand
conditions by analyzing copious information logically, systematically, and without interest or bias; (2) that human
beings are innately motivated to act strategically and efficiently to achieve material ends; and (3) that planners
can collect and analyze information about human conditions logically and systematically, without thinking
emotionally and irrationally.
The second section examines the meaning of “emotion” that is excluded by planning rationality. Although
conventional language of “emotion” implies that it is an external substance that prevents its victims from
thinking rationally, it is more accurate to say that “emotionally” is a particular way that persons with conscious
or, often, unconscious intentions choose to act. Persons think or act “emotionally” with regard to how they
assess relations with others. For example, people regard those who please or care for them lovingly and those
who displease or harm them angrily. Such reactions to others strongly influence people’s thinking and actions.
The third section of the paper describes the increasing attention that academic fields and professions other than
planning have given to emotion. Sociology, geography, and economics have scholars who study “emotions” with
an interest in how reactions to relationships influence individual and aggregate behavior. The legal and health
professions have subgroups interested in how emotional thinking and action have contributed to problems,
influenced professional decision making, and should be taken into account in addressing problems.

The fourth section describes the limited attention planning has given emotion. A few studies of individual
planners have examined emotional thinking as a contributor to planners’ difficulties’ rationally analyzing issues
and as a resource for understanding and addressing problems where purely rational approaches are inadequate.
A few studies of comminuty have shown how individuals’ attachments to comminuty matter to their identity
and how community identities influence people’s thinking and action, sometimes in conflict with realistic
planning requirements. These studies show that, although the rational model assumes away emotion, emotion
influences planning.
The fifth section offers explanations for why planners ignore emotion: (1) planners based claims for professional
status on having specialized rational skills; (2) people who want to avoid emotional activity are attracted to
planning because of its rational professional image; and (3) groups and institutions concerned about social order
value planning because its suppression of the recognition and expression of emotional activity supports order.
For these reasons planning is likely to continue to ignore emotional activity.
References
 Baum, H. S. (1997). The organization of hope: comminuty planning themselves. Albany: SUNY Press.
 Forester, J. (1999). The deliberative practitioner: Encouraging participatory planning processes.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
 Fried, M. (1963). "Grieving for a lost home." In L. J. Duhl (ed.), The urban condition: People and policy in
the metropolis (pp. 151-171). New York: Simon and Schuster.




Hoch, C. (2006). "Emotion and planning." Planning Theory & Practice, 7, 367-382.
Marris, P. (1987). Meaning and action: Community planning and conceptions of change. London:
Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 597
ACTING UNDER THE INFLUENCE: PLANS AS IMPROVISATIONAL GIFTS
Abstract System ID#: 386
Individual Paper
BOYER, Robert [University of North Carolina at Charlotte] rboyer1@uncc.edu, presenting author, primary author
HOPKINS, Lewis [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] ldhopkin@illinois.edu
Public- and private-sector decision makers in the built environment confront dynamics failure—the consequence
of decisions that are interdependent, irreversible, indivisible, and made with imperfect foresight (Hopkins 2001).
So too do improvisational comedians. Improvisational comedy is a form of live theater in which autonomous
players collaborate to create full and coherent story lines—including meaningful characters, objectives,
relationships, and environments— with neither a script nor a central creative authority. While such a scenario is
vulnerable to gridlock and incoherence, trained improvisers employ three practices that help them cope with
such uncertainty on stage: (1) they accept each others ideas (known as “gifts”) and offer new "gifts" in return—a
strategy known colloquially as saying “Yes, &”; (2) they “play games” that structure action and dialogue; and (3)
they build “group mind” by performing repeatedly with familiar players (see Besser, Roberts, and Walsh 2013;
Halpern, Close, and Johnson 1994).
Drawing from a set of planning cases, which we re-format into improvisational dialogue, we illustrate how private
and public actors in urban regions, making separate decisions, cope with the “four I’s” in much the same way as
improvisers: (1) they make plans and use each other’s plans (saying Yes, &); (2) they subscribe to pre-existing
decision-making structures (playing games), and (3) they form coalitions of actors with no a priori reason to
cooperate (building group mind). Improvisational theater is not completely foreign to research in the planning
discipline (e.g. Inam 2010; O’Leary, Bingham, and Choi 2010). These applications, however, focus on the benefits
of improvisation while navigating unpredictable social environments with the objective of reaching a single
consensus decision before taking action. While we do not debate these claims and agree that these benefits
deserve further exploration, this paper argues that improv is also a useful analogy for how plans work (and ought
to work) as communication among public and private organizations that are also taking separate actions rather
than trying to reach consensus before acting. Our argument is not that plans are the only means of such
communication, but that this use and function of plans is important to making sense of what plans can do as
coordination without enforcement.
The improvisational vignettes aspire to show, also, that individuals and organizations sometimes use plans not as
if they were predetermined outcomes to be implemented—as if they were a script in a theatrical performance—
but rather use plans as signals of intentions and possibilities that shape and justify new decisions and new plans
as new information and new circumstances emerge over time (Hopkins 2014; Boyer 2014). We use these
vignettes to illustrate that narratives that emphasize time, coalitions, and plans can help planners make valuable
plans, and help actors in an urban environment use plans in valuable ways.
References
 Besser, Matt, Ian Roberts, and Matt Walsh. 2013. The Upright Citizens Brigade Comedy Improvisation
Manual. Comedy Council of Nicea, LLC.
 Boyer, Robert. 2014. “Improvisational Comedy as Social Learning; Scripted Theater as Instrumental
Rationality.” A Paper Presented at the 54th Annual Conference of the Association of Collegiate Schools
of Planning, Philadelphia, PA., November 1.
 Halpern, Charna, Del Close, and Kim Johnson. 1994. Truth in Comedy: The Manual of Improvisation.
Meriwether Pub.
 Hopkins, Lewis D. 2001. Urban Development: The Logic Of Making Plans. Island Press.



Hopkins, Lewis D. 2014. “It Is about Time: Dynamics Failure, Using Plans and Using Coalitions.” Town
Planning Review 85 (3): 313–18. doi:10.3828/tpr.2014.19.

Abstract Index #: 598
ECONOMIC EXPERTISE AND RESULTS-BASED DEVELOPMENT PLANNING: THE CASE OF GROWTH DIAGNOSTICS
Abstract System ID#: 422
Individual Paper
BHATT, Jigar [Columbia University] jdb2171@columbia.edu
This research investigates how economic expertise influences development planning and administration through
a case study of results-based development at a recently established US aid agency. It aims to make a theoretical
contribution by taking a science and technology studies (STS) approach to address the asymmetrical treatment of
experts in the planning and development literature. When experts fail, politics has triumphed over rationality.
When experts succeed, the credit goes to rationality, not politics. By turning the focus to economists’ styles of
reasoning and planning tools, this dissertation treats experts’ success as having political effects of its own. Doing
so allows us to treat economist-led, results-based development not as a process of depoliticization, of technical
solutions prevailing over political interests and values, but as an explicitly political project that can format power
relations and reshape the planning and implementation process. This focus on what economists do also has
implications for planning practice because it opens up new avenues for potential reform. Rather than addressing
the ‘democratic-deficit’ in global development through participatory processes alone, we can pursue democracy
by ‘getting inside’ the techniques.
The paper takes as its case a results-based development model at the US Millennium Challenge Corporation
(MCC). The MCC was established in 2003 as a response to the Monterrey Consensus on Development Finance
that called for a focus on donor-recipient partnership, poverty reduction, and a focus on results. Using an
embedded design, two particular techniques important to MCC’s operations that have achieved wide popularity
over the past decade – growth diagnostics and randomized controlled trials – are each separately examined as
part of the broader case. The technique discussed here is that of growth diagnostics and its influence on MCC’s
bureaucratic relations and development plans. Unlike the more uniform policy prescriptions of the Washington
Consensus era, diagnostics are designed to help improve development effectiveness by finding the right ‘recipe’
for growth given a particular national context.
Secondary data from government documents and primary data from interviews with professionals in the US
global development community support the paper's findings. Potential implications for planning theory and
development practice will be briefly explored.
References
 Brint, S. (1990). Rethinking the policy influence of experts: From general characterizations to analysis of
variation. In Sociological Forum (Vol. 5, pp. 361–385). Springer.
 Flyvbjerg, B. (1998). Rationality and Power: Democracy in Practice. (S. Sampson, Trans.). University Of
Chicago Press.
 Hirschman, D., & Berman, E. P. (2014). Do economists make policy? On the political effects of
economics. Socio-Economic Review.
 Rodrik, D. (2010). Diagnostics before Prescription. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(3), 33–44.
 Turner, S. P. (2013). The Politics of Expertise. New York: Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 599
HUMAN DIGNITY AND SPATIAL JUSTICE: CAN EQUITABLE PLANS RESULT IN HUMILIATION?
Abstract System ID#: 441
Individual Paper

DAVY, Benjamin [TU Dortmund University] benjamin.davy@udo.edu
The recent flurry of books on just city (Fainstein 2010) or spatial justice (Soja 2010) suggests that planners
create better places by implementing a certain concepts of justice. Traditionally, this view has been challenged by
urban economists, who stipulated more jobs be created by introducing more efficient modes of production
(which often meant merely cost-saving, capital-enhancing modes). However, the idea of spatial justice must be
questioned from an entirely different perspective, too. What if a plan conforms with a socially preferred standard
of justice, but is humiliating to one or several persons whose destiny is affected by this plan?
A taunting illustration of the tensions between spatial justice and human dignity are poor-door-developments.
Responding to the housing needs of poor persons, several Western city with rapidly growing land markets (e.g.,
London, New York City) have coerced real estate developers to set aside floor space quotas for less affluent
tenants. This demand has been based on a vigorous interpretation of social justice: Land prices and land rents
must not exclude poor persons from access to affordable housing in urban neighborhood. As a response to this
demand, however, the developers have come up with a peculiar design concept: The high-end portions of the
new buildings only can be reached through a “posh door”. Access to the high-end sections of the new buildings
depends on paying high service fees for 24/7 security, brightly lit corridors, generously spaced common area,
wellness spas, aroma and sound management, or other amenities. Tenants, who cannot afford to pay such
service fees, may reach their apartments through back-doors which have been dubbed by an unfriendly press as
“poor doors” (http://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jul/25/poor-doors-segregation-london-flats). But is
the consideration for a tenant’s ability to afford high service fees not also a credit to social justice? After all, land
markets would prevent poor persons from affording an apartment in the most desirable quarters of affluent
cities like London or Manhattan. Only the administration of a vigorous pro-poor land policy helps establish spatial
justice. The promotion of social justice, however, can result in a humiliation if the “beneficiaries” of the pro-poor
policy feel degraded by the poor-door-design.
Cities always have been a place for very wealthy, moderately wealthy, middle-income, poor, and extremely poor
persons. T.H. Marshall’s (1950) concept of social citizenship, in fact, is based on the idea of a spatial segregation
accompanying social stratification – provided that every person receives her or his modicum. Surely, the
existence of city as such has never been questioned as being a humiliation or degradation. Rather in the
opposite, city have been considered as places of opportunity and freedom from restrictions that village
populations had to suffer as a consequence of the strict and scarcely distributed rural spaces.
The paper explores the surprising relationship between discourses on justice (open to general debate and
contention) and discourses on human dignity (limited to each and every person’s intimate sense of self-respect).
The first clash that occurs, obviously, concerns the format of such discourses. Justice discourses invite
contradictions and contestations, dignity discourses beg for respect and decency. Already at this stage, planners
must hate dignity discourses. Moreover, dignity discourses give voice to everyone who has already lost in the
justice discourse. For planners, this means that everybody whose case has been turned down during public
participation or even courtroom trials, will come back and claim to have been victimized by a humiliating
planning practice. Planners can hardly ignore the call for human dignity. After all, virtually all international human
rights treaties draw from the unwaveringly concept of human dignity, and more than 130 constitutions
worldwide contain explicit dignity clauses. Yet, is human dignity a better standard for planning than spatial justice
(Margalit 1996)?
References
 Davy, Benjamin (2014) Non-humiliating plans! A human rights approach. FLOOR Working Paper No. 20
(www.floorgroup.de).
 Fainstein, Susan (2010) The just city. Ithaca – London: Cornell University Press.
 Margalit, Avishai (1996) The decent society. Translated by N. Goldblum. Cambridge, MA & London:
Harvard University Press.
 Marshall, Thomas Humphrey (1950). Citizenship and social class and other essays. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
 Soja, Edward W. (2010) Seeking spatial justice. Minneapolis – London: University of Minnesota Press.

Abstract Index #: 600
USING ANT AND ASSEMBLAGE THINKING TO EXPLORE URBAN ENERGY INITIATIVES
Abstract System ID#: 446
Pre-organized Session: Planning Theory and the New Materialism
RYDIN, Yvonne [University College London] Y.Rydin@ucl.ac.uk
In response to the challenge of overcoming excessive centralisation of the energy system, there has been a
recent wave of experimentation with urban energy initiatives at the local level. The paper reflects on the use of
key concepts from Actor-Network Theory and associated assemblage theorising to explore such experimentation.
It analyses thirteen case studies of urban energy initiatives, nine in the UK but four from USA, Germany, the
Netherlands and Sweden. Based on a critique of the perspective on the local energy project provided by the
Multi-Level Perspective, it uses assemblage thinking to explore the forces stabilising and destabilising such
projects and to consider how the radical symmetry of ANT between the material and social makes a difference.
This suggests that fours sets of relationships play a particularly important role: relationships with the local
environment, those structured by economic models and artefacts, the social capital of social networks and
prevailing values. It further considers how an assemblage may move beyond being anchored in the locality to
become a mobilised project capable of spreading experimentation. Finally the paper reflects on the contribution
of ANT and assemblage theorising for such an analysis and for understanding urban experimentation more
broadly.
The paper draws on the research undertaken with the CLUES (Challenging Lock-in through Urban Energy system)
project, funded by the UK EPSRC under Grant EP/1002170/1. The contribution of colleagues within this project is
gratefully acknowledged.
References
 Bulkeley, H., Castàn Broto, V. and Edwards, G. (2014) An Urban Politics of Climate Change:
experimentation and the governing of socio-technical transitions London: Routledge
 Farias, I. and Bender, T. I (eds) (2010) Urban Assemblages: How Actor-Network Theory changes urban
studies London: Routledge
 Latour, B. (2005) Reassembling the Social: An introduction to Actor-Network Theory Oxford: OUP
 Murdoch, J. and Abram, S. (2004) Rationalities of Planning: development versus environment in planning
for housing Farnham, Surrey: Ashgate
 Rydin, Y., Turcu, C., Guy, S. and Austin, P. (2013) ‘Mapping the coevolution of urban energy system:
pathways of change’ Environment and Planning A 45, 634-649 http:/dx.doi.org/10.1068/a45199

Abstract Index #: 601
WHEN IRRESISTIBLE FORCES MEET IMMOVEABLE SUBJECTS: FACING THE CHALLENGING SUBJECT OF
OPPOSITION IN PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 452
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session
MOUAT, Clare [University of Western Australia] clare.mouat@uwa.edu.au
INCH, Andy [University of Sheffield] a.inch@sheffield.ac.uk
LEGACY, Crystal [RMIT University] crystal.legacy@rmit.edu.au
Urban development can often seem an irresistible force. The imperatives of new projects and profits seem deeply
inscribed in the DNA of liberal capitalist societies. The state may seek to mediate, ameliorate or shape this force,
establishing a claim to a greater public interest in certain forms of development. As it does so, the force grows
even more irresistible and space for political challenge is closed down. Yet, such irresistible force often summons
seemingly immoveable subjects of resistance: citizens and campaign groups who stand steadfast against planned

change and declare that they will not be moved. The immovable subjects of resistance may be mobilized by
diverse concerns: from perceived threats to valued place attachments or a sense of environment injustice,
through to more ideological motivations, whether in defense of private property rights or as a challenge to them.
These contradictory impulses may even be combined in sometimes surprising ways against the irresistible forces
of development (Frick, 2013).
Contemporary planning theory struggles to make sense of the ambiguous political challenges posed by the
subject of opposition. Dominant theoretical accounts of consensus and conflict highlight the problem. If
opponents are often immovable, movement is precisely what those who would promote mediation, agreement,
accommodation (or even compromise) require. Yet little attention has been paid to the shifting of subject
positions involved, the requirement to cultivate new individual and collective identities. Others argue that moves
towards agreement undermine the political energies and identities that drive opposition. However, the
alternative seems to leave little space for anything but a digging of trenches, preparation for conflict that
forecloses the possibility of any collective learning.
This roundtable starts from the view that, amidst promising theoretical and practical attempts to reconcile
conflict and consensus (recent contributions include Porter and Barry, 2014; Legacy, Mouat and March, 2014;
Frick, 2013; Bond, 2011; and Forester, for example), inadequate attention has been paid to the immoveable
subjects that challenge the irresistible forces of development. We therefore seek to explore how planning theory
and practice can learn from new ways of engaging with the subject of opposition: how is the political subject
expected to inhabit, engage, and resist in democratic process? How should such opposition be understood in
relation to wider civic cultures and the ties of collective membership and mutual obligation that they cultivate?
What contributions do these forms of citizenship make to the shaping of urban life and to social learning about
how we can promote more sustainable forms of coexistence?
This roundtable will explore how experiences from a variety of international contexts might begin to answer
these and related questions, opening new directions for understanding and activating the contemporary politics
of urban_planning and development in strategic and everyday ways.
References
 Bond, Sophie. 2011. "Negotiating a ‘democratic ethos’." Planning Theory 10 (2):161-186.
 Forester, John. 2013. "On the theory and practice of critical pragmatism: Deliberative practice and
creative negotiations." Planning Theory 12 (1):5-22.
 Frick, Karen Trapenberg. 2013. "The Actions of Discontent: Tea Party and Property Rights Activists
Pushing Back Against Regional Planning." Journal of the American Planning Association 79 (3):190-200.
 Legacy, Crystal, Alan March, and Clare M Mouat. 2014. "Limits and potentials to deliberative
engagement in highly-regulated planning system: norm development within fixed rules." Planning
Theory and Practice 15 (1):26-40.
 Porter, Libby, and Janice Barry. 2014. "Bounded recognition: urban_planning and the textual mediation
of Indigenous rights in Canada and Australia." Critical Policy Studies 9 (1):22-40.

Abstract Index #: 602
CONFRONTING THE CHALLENGE OF HUMANIST PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 468
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session
RIVERO, Juan [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] jj_rivero@yahoo.com
GOOD, Ryan [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] ryan.good@rutgers.edu
BAUM, Howell [University of Maryland] hbaum@umd.edu
FORESTER, John [Cornell University] jff1@cornell.edu
LAKE, Robert [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] rlake@rci.rutgers.edu
UMEMOTO, Karen [University of Hawaii] kumemoto@hawaii.edu
ZITCER, Andrew [Drexel University] andrew.zitcer@drexel.edu

FRIEDMANN, John [University of British Columbia] jrpf@mail.ubc.ca
In this panel, we investigate the contours of a humanist planning, exploring its current role in planning theory,
research, and practice. Humanism encompasses a broad array of philosophical positions based around the
primacy of human nature and agency (Plummer 2004). In this roundtable, our look at humanism foregrounds an
overarching focus on human welfare and on the full development of human capacities. We ask what planning
centered around human experiences, needs, and desires looks or should look like.
The field of planning has consistently negotiated a tension between the requirements of urbanization and
humanistic concerns. The priority of these concerns, however, and the methods by which knowledge of them is
constructed and integrated into planning practice have evolved and remain contested. Critics have questioned
whether planning has ever been humanistic and have faulted it for being unduly bound to the forces of
bureaucracy and the market, losing track of the essential questions: “What are we planning for? What are the
values of our planning?” (Fromm 1972, 68).
How might planning better heed the humanist call? Epistemologically, this query looks beyond equitable
deliberations into "planning for whom?" and poses the anterior question of "how do we know?"
Methodologically, it asks how planning can and should respond to the fullness of human experience. Ultimately,
we would like to consider whether and how a humanist orientation might offer planning the means to better
accommodate and cultivate social transformation.
Moderators:
Ryan M. Good, Rutgers University
Juan J. Rivero, Rutgers University
Andrew Zitcer, Drexel University
References
 Berman, M. (1988). All That Is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of Modernity. New York, New York:
Penguin Books.
 Fromm, Erich. “Humanistic Planning.” Journal of the American Institute of Planners 38, no. 2 (March
1972): 67–71
 Plummer, Ken. “Humanism and Humanistic Research.” In Encyclopedia of Social Science Research
Methods, by Michael Lewis Beck, Alan Bryman, and Tim Liao. 2455 Teller Road, Thousand Oaks
California 91320 United States: SAGE Publications, Inc., 2004.

Abstract Index #: 603
PLANNING SUPPORT system AS PRAGMATIC TOOLS OF INQUIRY
Abstract System ID#: 470
Individual Paper
GOODSPEED, Robert [University of Michigan] rgoodspe@umich.edu
Contemporary planning practice involves a wide range of knowledge, increasingly contained within computer
models and other digital tools such as GIS databases, transportation models, and other planning support system.
These tools pose a theoretical problem for the field. On the one hand, they are thought necessary to produce
high quality plans, given their ability to introduce knowledge and test alternative proposals. On the other hand,
the tools present a challenge for democratic accountability, since they are created by experts and therefore may
not reflect local perspectives. Existing professional approaches to this problem, such as joint fact-finding
(Ehrmann and Stinson, 1999) or mediated modeling, have not proposed theories which can apply broadly to
professional practice. Furthermore, unlike other aspects of planning practice, normative theory of this issue is
underdeveloped in the collaborative planning literature.

This paper develops one theoretical approach to this dilemma which builds on the ideas of John Dewey (1985
[1927]) and scholars of expertise in the field of science, technology, and society (STS). Theorists have proposed
three approaches to the problem of expertise in democracy: a defense of some form of technocracy, an
argument for dissolving the distinction between experts and non-experts (e.g., Fischer, 2000; Tironi, 2013), and a
proposal for a critical interaction between experts and non-experts (e.g., Dewey 1985 [1927], Futrell, 2003).
Building on the last approach, the paper develops John Dewey’s concept of a tool of inquiry, which is an artifact
used by a democratic public for investigation that results in greater collective intelligence. Dewey proposes such
tools can be held democratically accountable through connected and continuous critical interaction between
expert tool-makers and the public, where tools of inquiry are shaped and tested. After Futrell (2003) and other
STS scholars, the critical interaction should extend to both the division of labor between experts and non-experts,
as well as the definitions, norms, and assumptions reflected in the knowledge.
The paper then conducts a preliminary application of these ideas to planning, and discusses how it might be used
to guide future research. Projects differ in whether or not tools are used in critical interaction with a public for
inquiry, and whether or not the critical interaction extends to tool shaping and testing. These two variables
produce four project types. Each of the types is illustrated with projects described in the literature. Although
conceptualized in diverse ways, this general framework seemingly explains variation in reported measures of
project success. In particular, projects where tools are not used by a public engaged in inquiry, and where the
tool is not shaped and tested, result in less evidence of group intelligence. The paper closes by discussing how the
theory might be further operationalized and tested. In addition, the paper identifies several area in need of
further theoretical development: social perspectives on expertise, strategic use of artifacts, and the formation of
democratic publics.
References
 Dewey, John. 1985 [1927]. The Public and Its Problems. Chicago: Swallow Press.
 Ehrmann, John R, and Barbara L Stinson. 1999. "Joint fact-finding and the use of technical experts." In
The Consensus Building Handbook, edited by Lawrence E. Susskind, Sarah McKearnen and Jennifer
Thomas-Lamar, p. 375-399. Thousand Oaks, California: SAGE Publications, Inc.
 Fischer, Frank. 2000. Citizens, Experts, and the Environment: The Politics of Local Knowledge. Durham,
NC: Duke University Press.
 Futrell, Robert. 2003. "Technical adversarialism and participatory collaboration in the US chemical
weapons disposal program." Science, Technology & Human Values 28 (4):451-482.
 Tironi, Manuel. 2013. "Modes of technification: Expertise, urban controversies and the radicalness of
radical planning." Planning Theory 14 (1):70-89.

Abstract Index #: 604
LEARNING FROM GROUNDWATER: PRAGMATIC COMPROMISE PLANNING COMMON GOODS
Abstract System ID#: 501
Individual Paper
HOCH, Charles [University of Illiniois at Chicago] chashoch@uic.edu, presenting author, primary author
VIDYARTHI, Sanjeev [University of Illinois at Chicago] svidy@uic.edu
Planners often struggle with the ethical ambiguity of compromise in the preparation of development plans. The
plans they make face the resistance and criticism of powerful economic and political interests competing for
status, resources and authority. What help can planning scholarship offer to practitioners seeking reassurance
and guidance for their efforts to make plans serving a public good? In this essay, we take a pragmatic approach
that avoids the effort to secure a theoretical foundation for moral judgment; and looks instead to the practical
arts of seeking common ground. Instead of pursuing ideal rules or principles to guide judgment, we argue that
practitioners should look to the ways in which people make plans to bridge the political challenge between
economic competition and social cooperation.

We use a pragmatist approach in this essay to cast the strong distinctions between public, common and private
goods as differences in degree whose ethical relevance for professional planning practice depends on how
practitioners conceive relevance, context and use. Instead of exhorting practitioners to be just or accomplish
optimal good, we would do better exploring how different plan-makers conceive and reconcile many ethical
beliefs and ideals as they make and persuade others to follow their spatial plans. Professionals can and should
learn the laws, rules, customs and methods that describe the range of norms and principles relevant for the
discipline. But the pragmatist believes that meaningful ethical judgment requires paying attention to what planmakers do in the context of a complex situation where moral, social and political differences shape the problems
that emerge. We can learn from detailed narrative accounts of plan making and perusal if they provide enough
relevant detail to reconstruct the context for judgment at the center of attention.
The paper begins by describing the pragmatic approach to issues of moral judgment in the conception and
making of spatial plans. The next section explains the importance of social learning and collaborative planning
work for ideas about public interest and public goods. The following section highlights the importance of
identifying interdependencies and seeking compromises for making better and effective plans. The final section
interprets three very different episodes of groundwater planning in Northwestern India as instances of long term
pragmatic compromise. Compromise is not inherently bad even if it may yield bad outcomes. Pragmatism
embraces plan compromise as a way to reconcile differences enough to coordinate a common good and still
endure mutual antagonism.
References
 Unger RM (2007) The Self Awakened: Pragmatism Unbound. Cambridge: Harvard University Press
 World Bank. 2010. Deep wells and prudence: Towards pragmatic action for addressing groundwater
overexploitation in India. Washington D.C.: World Bank.
 Innes JE and Booher DE (2010) Planning with Complexity: An Introduction to Rationality for Public Policy.
New York: Routledge
 Mandeulbaum S (2000) Open Moral comminuty. Cambridge: MIT Press.
 Margalit A (2010) On Compromise And Rotten Compromises. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Abstract Index #: 605
CITY-STORIES: NARRATIVE AS DIAGNOSTIC AND STRATEGIC RESOURCE IN CIUDAD DEL ESTE, PARAGUAY
Abstract System ID#: 517
Pre-organized Session: Storytelling and Planning
TUCKER, Jennifer [University of California, Berkeley] jennifertucker@berkeley.edu
Since the ‘argumentative turn’ in planning (Fischer & Forester, 1993), an increasing number of planning theorists
have considered the role of discursive practices like narrative and storytelling. Planning theorists working in the
tradition of communicative rationality have promoted ‘planning as persuasive storytelling,’ focusing on the
narrative actions of planners as they aim to build a shared vision of city futures (Hoch, 1994; Throgmorton, 1996,
2003). Planning scholars have also considered how storytelling can be interpreted as ‘critique and/or
explanation;’ a means to analyze general processes of urban change (Sandercock, 2003). From this perspective,
conflicting narratives told by the different groups involved in planning interventions can be a productive means
to analyze power dynamics (Flyvbjerg & Richardson, 2002). Similarly, feminists argue that all knowledge is
embodied, partial, and situated (Haraway, 1988), as such, the stories of the marginalized and dispossessed are
also crucial perspectives through which to analyze the workings of power in the city, both in the Global North and
South (Roy, 2009; Watson, 2009).
My research investigates how planning and governance practice actually works in troublesome zones understood
as unplanned or ungoverned. In this paper, I present ethnographic research on Ciudad del Este, Paraguay, where
non-compliance with trade and use-of-space laws is widespread. Ciudad del Este hosts “the largest illicit economy
in the Western hemisphere” (Brown, 2009). Thus, I ask: how does planning practice work in spaces characterized
by widespread law-breaking by elites, the urban poor, and state actors alike? In contrast to the commonly held

assessment that Ciudad del Este, Paraguay is lawless and unplanned, I show how planners promote elite-led and
exclusionary urban transformation via the strategic deployment of narratives of the unplanned city, what I call
“city-stories.” With the concept city-stories, I highlight how the spatial fabric of a city comes into being through a
discursive, meaning-making register narrating what the city is, should be, and for whom. City-stories are also a
terrain of contestation. I analyze the city-stories of precarious street vendors as a diagnostic of power, as
embodied perspectives on everyday practices of regulation that can clarify how local state actors actively foster
spatial disorder and legal uncertainty as part of planning practice.
Brown, R. (2009). The Tri-Border Area: A profile of the largest illicit economy in the Western Hemisphere.
Financial Transparency Coalition. Retrieved from http://www.financialtransparency.org/2009/06/15/the-triborder-area-a-profile-of-the-largest-illicit-economy-in-the-western-hemisphere/
Caldeira, T. P. do R. (2001). City of Walls: Crime, Segregation, and Citizenship in São Paulo. University of California
Press.
Fischer, F., & Forester, J. (1993). The argumentative turn in policy analysis and planning. Durham, N.C: Duke
University Press Books.
Flyvbjerg, B., & Richardson, T. (2002). Planning and Foucault: in search of the dark side of planning theory.
Planning Futures: New Directions for Planning Theory, London and New York: Routledge, 44–62.
Haraway, D. J. (1988). Situated knowledges: The science question in feminism and the privilege of partial
perspective. Feminist Studies, 14(3), 575–599.
Hoch, C. (1994). What Planners Do: Power, Politics, and Persuasion. Chicago, Ill: APA Planners Press.
Roy, A. (2009). The 21st-century metropolis: New geographies of theory. Regional Studies, 43(6), 819–830.
Sandercock, L. (2003). Out of the closet: The importance of stories and storytelling in planning practice. Planning
Theory & Practice, 4(1), 11–28.
Throgmorton, J. A. (1996). Planning as persuasive storytelling: The rhetorical construction of Chicago’s electric
future. University of Chicago Press.
Throgmorton, J. A. (2003). Planning as persuasive storytelling in a global-scale web of relationships. Planning
Theory, 2(2), 125–151.
Watson, V. (2009). Seeing from the South: Refocusing urban_planning on the Globe’s Central Urban Issues. Urban
Studies, 46(11), 2259–2275.
References
 Caldeira, T. P. do R. (2001). City of Walls: Crime, Segregation, and Citizenship in São Paulo. University of
California Press.
 Flyvbjerg, B., & Richardson, T. (2002). Planning and Foucault: in search of the dark side of planning
theory. Planning Futures: New Directions for Planning Theory, London and New York: Routledge, 44–62.
 Haraway, D. J. (1988). Situated knowledges: The science question in feminism and the privilege of partial
perspective. Feminist Studies, 14(3), 575–599.
 Roy, A. (2009). The 21st-century metropolis: New geographies of theory. Regional Studies, 43(6), 819–
830.
 Sandercock, L. (2003). Out of the closet: The importance of stories and storytelling in planning practice.
Planning Theory & Practice, 4(1), 11–28.

Abstract Index #: 606
IS THERE A CRISIS OF PARTICIPATORY PLANNING?
Abstract System ID#: 531
Individual Paper
LEGACY, Crystal [RMIT University] crystal.legacy@rmit.edu.au
Monno and Khakee (2012) recently declared a “crisis of participatory planning” suggesting that urban politics has
transitioned into a post-political context rendering citizen participation in urban change processes void of
substance and influence. A recent contribution by Purcell (2013) provokes thinking about the relationship
between participation in planning and what it means to be a citizen that lives within and actively engages in an

urban democracy. The critical literature on participation and of deliberative democracy more generally warn that
a focus on “consensus politics” evades the political in planning preventing citizens from confronting and
challenging public discourse and prevailing planning orthodoxy about the way the urban is constituted and recreated, for whom and by who. Instead, the formal processes of city planning set out clearly defined sites for
citizen engagement to occur (e.g. city visioning processes early in the strategic planning process) that may limit
broader expressions of engaged citizenship, particularly at the stages of implementation. Yet, despite a dedemocratisation of planning through excessive emphasis upon these formal and rather narrow spaces of
participation, engaged citizens continue to punctuate planning through informal, collective, grassroots action or
through focused, sometimes site specific oppositional campaigns, shaping the urban environment and urban
political landscapes. Between the political landscapes and the post-political neoliberal context, a binary is
established (Bylund, 2012).
Raising questions on what it means to be an engaged urban citizen within the political/post-political binary, this
paper critically engages with the view that there exists a “crisis of participatory planning”. The paper will argue
that at the intersection of the political/post-political binary a re-democratisation of city is challenging traditional
conceptualisations of what it means to be an engaged citizen. The paper will draw upon the delivery of
contentious infrastructure projects in Toronto, Melbourne and Sydney to explore the ways in which citizens are
reinvigorating participatory practice, offering insights into the role and potential for urban political contestation.
References
 Bylund, J 2012, 'Postpolitical correctness?', Planning Theory, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 319-27.
 Monno, V & Khakee, A 2012, 'Tokenism or political activism? Some reflections on participatory planning',
International Planning Studies, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 85-101.
 Purcell, M 2013, The down-deep delight of democracy, John Wiley & Sons, West Sussex.

Abstract Index #: 607
MOBILIZING BOGOTá: STORIES FROM ELSEWHERE AS URBAN GOVERNANCE TOOLS
Abstract System ID#: 540
Pre-organized Session: Storytelling and Planning
MONTERO, Sergio [University of California, Berkeley] smontero@berkeley.edu
In recent decades, the speed and geographical extent at which policy and planning ideas are circulating has
increased significantly thanks to communication technologies and a new generation of traveling and increasingly
interconnected planning experts, policy-makers, NGO representatives and urban activists (Healey 2013; McCann
& Ward 2011). International policy models or “best practices” are either celebrated as inspirational examples
that can spur policy change and learning in other places or critiqued as “one-size-fits-all” models that do not
consider the complexity of local contexts. Less is known, however, about the role of models and “best practices”
as urban governance tools. One city that has recently entered into the selective global repertoire of urban policy
models is Bogotá, the capital of Colombia. Traditionally portrayed as an urban dystopia in the early 1990s, Bogotá
became a world policy model of sustainable urban transportation in less than a decade. Since 2001, city as diverse as
Jakarta, Guangzhou or Los Angeles among more than one hundred others, have implemented a Bus Rapid Transit
(BRT) system drawing inspiration from Bogotá’s Transmilenio BRT. In the same time period, mayors,
transportation planners and bike advocates in more than 120 city have referenced Ciclovía, a 70-mile weekly
car-free event in Bogotá, to pass local street closure program in their home city, bot in the global North and the
South. Using qualitative and ethnographic methods, this paper examines the case of Guadalajara, Mexico’s
second largest city, where two non-state organizations helped introduced a new policy issue -sustainable urban
mobility- in the local and state government agenda in the mid 2000s making extensive use of references to
Bogotá, Colombia. Storytelling and study tours are identified as key learning practices through which Bogotá’s
policies were mobilized in Guadalajara. While this could be seen as an exercise of South-South urban policy
learning, an example of a Latin American city, Guadalajara, which learned innovative urban_planning mechanisms
from another Southern peer, in this paper, I’m more interested in showing how practices of inter-city policy
learning take place in a field of urban politics and governance. From this angle, the circulation of Bogotá stories

could be analyzed as a political resource and urban governance tool that helped two non-state organizations GDL 2020 and CEJ- introduce a policy issue in Guadalajara’s local public agenda.
References
 Healey, P. (2013). Circuits of knowledge and techniques: the transnational flow of planning ideas and
practices. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 37(5), 1510-1526.
 McCann, E., & Ward, K. (Eds.). (2011). Mobile urbanism: city and policymaking in the global age (Vol.
17). U of Minnesota Press.

Abstract Index #: 608
THE ROLE OF PLANNING RESEARCH IN TIMES OF ECONOMIC CRISIS
Abstract System ID#: 546
Individual Paper
SIEMIATYCKI, Matti [University of Toronto] siemiatycki@geog.utoronto.ca
The onset of the global financial crisis in 2008 deeply effected city and the people that live in them. In many
countries in the Western World, housing bubbles burst, unemployment rose precipitously, and personal and
corporate bankruptcies increased. The financial crisis also sharpened debates about the rise of income inequality,
concentrated poverty, the decline of the middle class, and the role of government in stimulating economic
growth by providing high quality public services. Indeed, these debates burst into the public consciousness, as
new social movements such as Occupy Wall Street and Idle No More coalesced to mobilize for change.
Amidst the start of an economic crisis that had significant urban antecedents and implications, it could be
expected that planning scholars would be front and center in producing research to understand the causes,
impacts, and responses to the crisis. Yet to date, it is not altogether clear whether the academic planning
discipline, especially as distinct from the broader field of urban studies or urban geography, has taken up the
challenge of developing a scholarly focus that is sensitive to the issues raised by the economic crisis, or the way
that it has impacted on the practice of planning.
Against this backdrop, the purpose of this paper is to examine whether the focus of published research in
planning has shifted in discernable ways to cover topics made pertinent by the economic crisis? In order to carry
out this analysis, the paper will report on the findings of a content analysis of articles published in the 10 top
ranked peer reviewed scholarly journals in planning, geography, urban studies and economics over the past
decade. This analysis identifies the extent to which the global financial crisis has become a major theme in urban
planning research, whether the common topics of published research have shifted since 2008 to respond to key
planning issues raised by the economic crisis, and the ways in which planning scholarship on the economic crisis
compares with other social science disciplines.
Through this analysis, I reflect on the relevance of planning research in the face of a global crisis that is reshaping
cities and the urban policy landscape. This research is intended to inform a broader discussion that is currently
taking place in the planning discourse about the role and societal significance of scholarly research in the field
(Siemiatycki, 2012; Campbell, 2012, Flyvbjerg, 2012). It has long been recognized that a primary goal for planning
scholarship is to acquire knowledge with the goal of informing action (Friedmann, 1987), and many scholars
report that one of their personal objectives is to carry out research that matters and makes a difference in the
world. This paper makes a contribution to discussions about the relevance of planning scholarship by exploring
how research in the discipline has responded to a contemporary crisis that has captivated public attention, and is
having a critical impact on planning practitioners and society as a whole.
References
 Campbell, H. (2012). Planning to Change the World: Between Knowledge and Action Lies Synthesis.
Journal of Planning Education and Research, 32(2) 135-146.





Flyvbjerg, B. (2012). Why Mass Media Matter to Planning Research: The Case of Megaprojects. Journal
of Planning Education and Research, 32(2), 169-81.
Friedmann, John. (1987). Planning in the public domain: From knowledge to action. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Siemiatycki, M. (2012) The role of the planning scholar: research, conflict, and social change, Journal of
Planning Education and Research, 32(2), 147-159.

Abstract Index #: 609
SELLING STORIES: ENTREPRENEURIAL NARRATIVES OF SOCIAL ENTREPRENEURIALISM
Abstract System ID#: 547
Pre-organized Session: Storytelling and Planning
LAKE, Robert [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] rlake@rci.rutgers.edu
Planners tell stories to create plausible realities, enroll diverse perspectives, mediate among competing interests,
and persuade protagonists to coalesce around preferred courses of action. Planners also sell stories, acting
entrepreneurially to capture and expand market share for policy and practices in which they have a personal or
professional investment. This paper traces the narrative produced by a small but dense network of policy
entrepreneurs seeking to expand the reach of social entrepreneurialism within the urban social policy arena in
the first decades of the twenty-first century. By social entrepreneurialism, I refer to the practices of social
enterprise investing, social impact finance, social impact bonds, and related initiatives that are gaining increasing
traction as mechanisms for mobilizing private capital to address urban social problems. Since adoption of the first
Social Impact Bond (SIB) in the UK in 2010, a highly active cadre of self-styled “thought leaders” in government,
philanthropic foundations, nonprofits, and the private sector has worked in close conjunction to sell the idea of
social impact finance to and within the U.S. urban policy marketplace. This entrepreneurial activity proceeds
through construction and dissemination of a singular narrative employing the repetition of selected tropes
(programs are “data driven,” “evidence based,” “cost effective”) valorized through mutual citation across
multiple media and transported by key individuals moving across academic, government, corporate,
philanthropic, and nonprofit sectors. Through successive cycles of mutual citation, the narrative of social
enterprise transcends the policy practice it purports to represent and instead becomes its own reality, texts
referring to texts to define the product, create a market, and make the sale.
References
 Lake, R. and Zitcer, A. 2012. Who Says? Authority, Voice, and Authorship in Narratives of Planning
Research. Journal of Planning Education and Research 32: 389-399
 McCann, E. and Ward, K. 2011. Mobile Urbanism: city and Policymaking in the Global Age.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
 Schram, S. and Neisser, P. 1997. Tales of the State: Narrative in Contemporary US Politics and Public
Policy. NY: Rowman & Littlefield.
 Tyler, S. 1987. The Unspeakable: Discourse, Dialogue and Rhetoric in the Postmodern World. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press.

Abstract Index #: 610
GOVERNING THE UNGOVERNABLE? MEDIATING CULTURES OF OPPOSITION TO PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Abstract System ID#: 643
Individual Paper
HICKMAN, Hannah [Visiting fellow, University of the West of England] hannah@hannahhickman.co.uk, presenting
author
INCH, Andy [University of Sheffield] a.inch@sheffield.ac.uk, primary author
WHILE, Aidan [University of Sheffield] a.h.while@sheffield.ac.uk

If urban development has long generated conflict, oppositional mobilisation has arguably become more
pronounced in many jurisdictions in recent years. Conservative opposition to new development presents
particular challenges for contemporary planning theory and practice since planners and planning processes are
typically tasked with managing the political energies generated whilst ensuring the future provision of key public
goods. One strand of communicative planning theory has been concerned to explore how planners might act as
mediators of conflict, shaping opportunities for reasoned debate that can lead to agreement. Well-rehearsed
critiques have, however, pointed to the potential for formally deliberative practices to function coercively,
masking the powerful mediating effects of wider social structures (ideologies, discourses and rationalities) and
displacing political energies that threaten to disrupt the search for agreement.
This paper contributes to understanding of how the political energies generated by seemingly intractable conflict
over urban development are currently mediated by planning processes. It does so by exploring the example of
planning for new housebuilding in England, an issue presented as a serious political and public policy problem in
recent years. Constructed in governmental discourse as a key contributor to a ‘housing crisis’, high levels of
opposition have been blamed for preventing and slowing down legitimate development that is required to meet
housing needs. In response, whilst retaining a strong rhetorical commitment to the promises of collaborative
governance, successive administrations have experimented with mechanisms for governing this problematic
issue by managing the conduct of local actors (citizens, planners, politicians) from a distance.
By way of illustration, the paper draws on empirical material collected as part of an ex-ante evaluation of a recent
government proposal to mediate conflict by offering financial incentives to influence the attitudes and behaviour
of citizens who oppose new housing development. In Foucauldian terms we explore, 1. the distinctive ways in
which this initiative constructed the problem of opposition, 2. the rationalities or mentalities that shaped this
attempt to govern the problem, and 3. the particular subject-positions that these would generate for local actors.
We then go on to examine how those actors understood the likely effects of this putative governmental
rationality on political struggles over new housing development.
Our analysis suggests that, by constructing opposition as a problem of rational self-interested economic action,
the neoliberal rationality underpinning this initiative misrecognises the complex range of often deeply felt
concerns and attachments that actually motivates opposition. As a result responses from professionals and
citizens suggested the proposal would be unlikely to substantially affect levels of opposition. Somewhat ironically,
actors in local government also highlighted the potentially disruptive effects of introducing a system of
incentives, suggesting that locally generated collaborative ‘fixes’ had emerged in many locations that were
capable of effectively 'managing' the problem of opposition.
Overall, we argue that planning theory should develop a richer understanding of the multiple and complex ways
in which planning disputes are mediated, both locally and at a distance. However, we also suggest that neither of
these means of dealing with the problem of opposition seems capable of doing justice to the political energies
that are generated. As a result local planning processes rely on a repertoire of defensive techniques that deflect
the wider political challenges presented by opposition. This means more research is required to understand the
range of effects generated by limited attempts to mediate opposition, particularly how the displacement of
political energies affects the local state and citizens who oppose. Ultimately, planning theory must consider how
broad societal cultures of opposition to development might be mediated.
References
 Inch, A (2012) Creating “a generation of NIMBYs”? Interpreting the role of the state in managing the
politics of urban development, Environment and Planning C 30 (3), 520-535
 Porter, Libby, and Janice Barry. 2014. "Bounded recognition: urban_planning and the textual mediation
of Indigenous rights in Canada and Australia." Critical Policy Studies 9 (1):22-40.
 McClymont K, O’Hare P, 2008, ‘We’re not NIMBYs!’ Contrasting local protest groups with idealised
conceptions of sustainable comminuty, Local Environment 13: 321 – 335.
 Dean, M (2010) Governmentality: Power and Rule in Modern Society, London, Sage
 Forester, J. (2012) Learning to Improve Practice: Lessons fromPractice Stories and Practitioners' Own
Discourse Analyses (or Why Only the LoonsShow Up), Planning Theory and Practice, 13 (1), 11-36

Abstract Index #: 611
PLANNING THROUGH THE RURAL LENS: INSIGHTS FOR THEORY AND PRACTICE
Abstract System ID#: 644
Individual Paper
FRANK, Kathryn [University of Florida] kifrank@ufl.edu, presenting author, primary author
HIBBARD, Michael [University of Oregon] mhibbard@uoregon.edu
Planning theory and practice continually evolve with society and the world. Planning scholars contribute to the
evolution of the field through their research and reflections. For example, advances in planning theory have come
from studies of practice (Boelens 2010) and from comparisons of the dominant perspective – North West
(developed) countries versus South East (developing) countries (Watson 2012). In that spirit, this paper will apply
the lens of rural planning scholarship, which contrasts to the pervasive urban perspective in the profession, to
gain insights for both theory and practice. The paper is empirically based upon a set of ten interviews of leading
rural specialists in North America, a group of five commentaries by planning scholars addressing “why rural
planning matters,” and the research-based literature.
Scholars have noted that over the past several decades procedural concerns such as communicative planning
have come to dominate the planning theory discussion. There is an argument for an expansion of the concerns of
planning theory to cover the spectrum of who, what, when, where, how, and why (Dobrucká 2014). Calls for
more substantive and normative planning theory have come from scholars concerned with the tangible problems
resulting from moral relativism, and scholars focused on specific issues of justice, the expanding scope of the
objects of planning (such as complex social-ecological system), and the need to better reflect “reality” (e.g.,
Harrison 2014). The rural lens emphasizes substantive planning theory due to the object of study, which in this
case is the “where”.
Rural area in North America are generally viewed in the materialist sense, as having low population densities
and strong connections to natural resource production, and environment amenities and ecosystem services
(Bell 2007). Rurality can also have idealist aspects, i.e., rural culture and values, which can transcend specific
places and times of the materialist rural (Ibid). Scholars and practitioners are increasingly paying attention to
rural places, the culture of rurality, and a rural lens, due to concerns of sustainability and integrative planning
approaches. The rural lens promises to provide insights not only for rural places and rural planning, but also for
planning more generally, including ideas for city (e.g., multifunctionalism and urban villages), and new
understandings of actors and system from individual/site to regional to global scales.
This paper will analyze the literature to elucidate the status of substantive planning theory and its connection to
the types of places as objects of scholarship and practice. The paper will also review the literature to show how
studying rural area, rural planning, and possibly rural ideals, have in the past contributed new ideas for planning.
The paper will then apply the primary data gathered – the rural specialist interviews and planning scholar
commentaries – to identify the implications for planning theory and practice derived from taking the rural lens,
and how these innovations relate to and reinforce general planning trends.
References
 Bell, Michael. M. 2007. “The Two-ness of Rural Life and the Ends of Rural Scholarship.” Journal of Rural
Studies 23: 402-415.
 Boelens, Luuk. 2010. “Theorizing Practice and Practising Theory: Outlines for an Actor-RelationalApproach in Planning.” Planning Theory 9 (1): 28-62.
 Dobrucká, Lucia. 2014. “Reframing Planning Theory in Terms of Five Categories of Questions.” Planning
Theory. Published online March 7, 2014. Accessed on March 3, 2015.
 Harrison, Philip. 2014. “Making Planning Theory Real.” Planning Theory 13 (1): 65-81.
 Watson, Vanessa. 2012. “Planning and the ‘Stubborn Realities’ of Global South-East city: Some
Emerging Ideas.” Planning Theory 12 (1): 81-100.

Abstract Index #: 612
PLANNING AS PERSUADED STORYTELLING: THE ROLE OF GENRE IN PLANNERS' NARRATIVES
Abstract System ID#: 660
Pre-organized Session: Storytelling and Planning
ZITCER, Andrew [Drexel University] andrew.zitcer@drexel.edu
Planning researchers craft stories in a variety of genres, from the academic article to the letter of
recommendation, from the syllabus to the commissioned report and plan. The existence and conventions of
genre are not accidental, as society codifies the forms that correspond to its ideology (Todorov 1976, 164). Each
genre boasts an audience with specific demands. Call it planning as persuaded storytelling, to twist a well-known
phrase (Throgmorton 2003). For planners’ stories to serve as both a means of expression and a tool designed to
shape futures (Cameron 2012, 576), the storyteller must achieve competence and comfort in the exigencies of
genre.
This paper draws from the author’s experience writing up the same data in two different genres. In 2013-2014, a
group of researchers explored arts access and participation in several neighborhood in West Philadelphia. These
neighborhoods have been traditionally underserved by arts funding, though their cultural life is robust.
Gentrification pressure from nearby anchor institutions has created additional urgency around bolstering the
existing cultural infrastructure. The author presented the data in a funder-commissioned report, as well as in an
academic journal article. Neither genre exercise adequately captured the comminuty’ lived experience; the
report and the journal article each bore constraints that called forth certain kinds of statements, certain kinds of
conclusions. Reports, often written to be accessible and designed to influence policy, demand their authors to be
declarative, prescriptive and commanding. Academic writing is perhaps more varied in tone, yet possess a more
ambiguous link to audience and policy consequence.
In order to comprehend why planners write the way we do, it is necessary to revisit and problematize the
expectations of audience and genre. We must interrogate questions of power, voice and authority in planner’s
stories (Lake and Zitcer 2012). We must determine the ways we are served by genre, and when contemporary
forms of storytelling fall short. If the goal of social science is to thoughtfully alter the dimensions of collective life
(Geertz 2000, 34), then perhaps the way forward calls us to transcend genre, writing new sorts of stories, morally
grounded and inventive.
References
 Cameron, Emilie. “New Geographies of Story and Storytelling.” Progress in Human Geography 36, no. 5
(October 1, 2012): 573–92.
 Geertz, Clifford. Local Knowledge: Further Essays in Interpretive Anthropology. Basic Books, 2000.
 Lake, R. W., and A. W. Zitcer. “Who Says? Authority, Voice, and Authorship in Narratives of Planning
Research.” Journal of Planning Education and Research 32, no. 4 (August 28, 2012): 389–99.
 Throgmorton, James A. “Planning as Persuasive Storytelling in a Global-Scale Web of Relationships.”
Planning Theory 2, no. 2 (July 1, 2003): 125–51.
 Todorov, Tzvetan. “The Origin of Genres.” Translated by Richard M. Berrong. New Literary History 8, no.
1 (October 1, 1976): 159–70.

Abstract Index #: 613
EVALUATION OF TWO LARGE SCALE URBAN (RE)DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS FROM A JUSTICE PERSPECTIVE
Abstract System ID#: 703
Individual Paper
LEE, Taehee [University of Sheffield] t.h.lee@sheffield.ac.uk

The central aim of this research is evaluates two directly related, and still highly controversial large scale urban
(re)development projects – the Cheong-gye-choen Restoration Project (CRP) and the Dongnam Distribution
Complex Project (DDCP) – from a justice perspective with a primary focus on issues for merchants. The main
research question that try to answer throughout this thesis is: if planning should pursue the public interest but
often unavoidably harm minority’s interests, how can planning be more just in relation to them?
Cheong-gye-cheon (CGC) is a 5.8km length historical river passing through the Seoul city centre, which was
covered up in the 1960s and 70s. Restoration of this historical river was acknowledged as good for the general
population. Simultaneously, however, there was one of the largest convention market in Korea, and the
restoration meant significant losses for many merchants without compensation. Severe conflicts occurred, and as
a result of negotiations, a relocation market was agreed to be provided to the merchants with special privileges
as a de facto compensation. This was why the DDCP was taken place. Yet, despite ostensibly ‘just’ processes of
both the CRP and the DDCP, the outcome of the DDCP turned out to be a failure. A large number of merchants
could / did not move into the market when it was completed, and most CGC merchants have experienced
significant losses. The failure of the DDCP also left a considerable debts to tax payers. These two project is still
highly controversial, particularly in terms of justness. The evaluation of the justness of the project require a
thorough investigation of the projects focusing on: why the seemingly undesirable outcome in relation to
merchants was generated; how we can evaluate from a justice perspective; and how the projects could have
been better and more just.
In order to do so, reviewing theories of justice and justice in planning is preceded. Michael Sandel and Heather
Campbell’s accounts are particularly influential in this process. Throughout the review, it is argued that justice is
inescapably judgemental and can only be reasoned through a politics of the common good. Yet, due to the dark
sides of the concepts of community and common good, this thesis proposes that both concepts are needed to be
reconceptualised, and judgements should be guided by universal values and practical principles. Influenced by
Campbell, this thesis argues that justice in planning is about situated ethical judgement through a politics of the
common good guided by universal values and practical principles. Subsequently, the applicability of the concept
of justice in planning in planning practices is explored.
Based on this conceptual framework of justice in planning, the processes and outcomes of the two consecutive
projects are scrutinised, focusing specifically on why merchants did not or could not move into the relocation
market in the end. The investigation shows that although the processes of both projects were seemingly
democratic, they were actually not, and as a result, there were misrecognitions about merchants’ economic
circumstances, exclusions, misinformation, and non-decision makings. It is also shown that even though the
agreement was satisfactory at the time it was made, fundamental reasons for the failure of the DDCP were
actually stemmed from the agreement. A large part of this, again, stemmed from institutional and cultural
contexts of Korea. By examining situations and judgements in the processes of the projects, possibilities for
better and more just planning practices are explored. Consequently, implications for the Korean planning system
and planning in justice literature are demonstrated.
References
 CAMPBELL, H. 2006. Just Planning. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 26, 92-106.
 SANDEL, M. J. 2009. JUSTICE: What’s the Right Thing to Do?, London, Penguin Books.
 CAMPBELL, H. 2002. Planning: An Idea of Value. The Town Planning Review, 73, 271-288.
 CAMPBELL, H. & MARSHALL, R. 2002. Utilitarianism’s Bad Breath? A Re-Evaluation of the Public Interest
Justification for Planning. Planning Theory, 1, 163-187.
 RAWLS, J. 1999. A Theory of Justice, Revised Edition, Oxford, Oxford University Press.

Abstract Index #: 614
DIY URBANISM AS CRITICAL ASSEMBLAGE URBANISM
Abstract System ID#: 704
Individual Paper

FOSTER, Nicole [University of Texas at Arlington] nicole.foster@mavs.uta.edu
Do-It-Yourself (DIY) Urbanism includes a wide range of spatial appropriation practices including guerilla
gardening, using vacant buildings for co-operative activities and other temporary transformations of neglected
urban spaces. As DIY Urbanism projects often emerge from grassroots efforts privileging use over exchange
value, some scholars suggest these practices challenge neoliberalism by enacting emergent forms of urban
citizenship. However, others argue that such place-based projects lack coherence and specificity in their agendas
and are too localized to have critical potential. This critique is valid if one assumes DIY Urbanism must reflect a
resistant agenda explicitly aimed at producing socially just outcomes. Assemblage theorists challenge this
assumption by arguing that new publics can emerge from disruptive, novel assemblages of affects, materiality
and discourses. In other words, how does playing with streets, buildings and vacant lots create unexpected
connections, new uses and collective claims for urban space?
In order to analyze the critical potential of these informal, creative spatial practices, this paper discusses
“embRACE the STREET”, a DIY Urbanism collective in Fort Worth, Texas. embRACE transformed a depressed
commercial corridor into a walkable arts district. Through participant observation and interviews, I trace the
connections between artists, residents, activists, realtors, city officials, developers and a collection of vacant
buildings, lots, trees and streets to identify emergent relationships, agendas and outcomes. Although some
actors assumed the project could advance social justice concerns, others hoped that the project would gentrify
the area. Clearly, embRACE reflects conflicting interests.
The project’s ambiguity should not automatically discount embRACE’s critical possibilities. The commercial
corridor - the street, buildings, animals and plant life - enabled unlikely relationships to develop among
antagonistic identities. Indeed, embRACE engendered an emergent feminist and postcapitalist public through
practices such as an artist cooperative, community garden and galleries. However, this assemblage may prove
too fragile to withstand development pressures. Currently, many properties on the street are now under contract
by a developer, indicating that the DIY interventions may have catalyzed neighborhood change processes. The
developer’s interests, which are supported by city officials, threaten to disrupt and displace these emergent
forms of cooperative economic and social activities.
However, this paper suggests that novel assemblages of material, affective and discursive practices, including
creative appropriations of urban space, can enable just social and economic arrangements despite neoliberalism.
As such, the paper concludes with a discussion of how critical planners can use DIY Urbanism to help assemble
the conditions of possibility for collective, ethical relationships in diverse urban comminuty as well as offer
support for these emergent publics.
References
 Arenas, Iván. 2014. “Assembling the Multitude: Material Geographies of Social Movements from Oaxaca
to Occupy.” Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 32 (3): 433–49.
 Beauregard, Robert A. 2012. “Planning with Things.” Journal of Planning Education and Research 32 (2):
182–90.
 Groth, Jacqueline, and Eric Corijn. 2005. “Reclaiming Urbanity: Indeterminate Spaces, Informal Actors
and Urban Agenda Setting.” Urban Studies 42 (3): 503–26.
 Hou, Jeffrey. 2010. Insurgent Public Space: Guerrilla Urbanism and the Remaking of Contemporary
Cities. New York: Taylor & Francis.
 Latour, Bruno, and Peter Weibel. 2005. Making Things Public: Atmospheres of Democracy. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.

Abstract Index #: 615
PREDICTION, PRAGMATISM, HOPE: HOW DETROIT'S PLANNERS APPROACH THE FUTURE
Abstract System ID#: 708
Individual Paper

MACMILLEN, James [Cornell University] jjm458@cornell.edu
Drawing on planning theory, cultural anthropology and science and technology studies, this paper examines the
dynamics of futurity in the redevelopment of postindustrial Detroit. Futurity concerns how planners, developers,
citizens, and others engage positively or normatively with what has ‘yet to come’, and it can take numerous
forms. It involves how a sense of the future acquires structure, through references to the short- or long-term,
‘windows’ of opportunity, or new eras; it encompasses how the future is envisaged, through anticipation,
imagination, or scenarios; it refers to the character of these futures, whether they appear plausible or desirable;
and it also obliges action in the present, such as preparedness or mitigation of risk. America’s postindustrial city
are ideal sites for tracing how such mechanisms of futurity intersect with urban_planning and policy-making.
Detroit’s pronounced economic decline has eroded the teleological confidence the city once enjoyed, and its vast
tracts of abandoned residential, commercial and industrial land have now become a major focus for
comprehensive projects of civic reimagination. Because such articulations of the future are no less laden with
knowledge claims, value judgments, and uneven power dynamics than those directed to the present, they
warrant critical attention. Exactly how do modes of anticipation, belief, hope, or strategic thought pertain to
urban change? How and by whom are they produced, and whom do they affect? What sort of power dynamics
do they imply? How are they disciplined, regulated, contested, or endorsed? And, crucially, what consequences
do they have for the tenets of participatory planning and urban wellbeing? [cf. 1]
Methodologically, the paper centers upon a seven-month ethnography of the City of Detroit Planning and
Development Department. As a guest researcher, I have been granted access to observe and participate in an
overhaul of the City’s official Master Plan, shadowing the Department’s staff as they engage various institutions,
organizations, and citizens in the planning process. Throughout, I have closely documented how Detroit’s
planners actually create, and respond to, alternate future visions for the city, how they make predictions about
Detroit, and how these are woven into their words, actions, routines, and strategies [cf. 2]. The ethnography is
supported and contextualized by approximately one hundred taped interviews and oral histories with planners,
institutions, organizations, and citizens involved in Detroit’s planning processes, as well as archival research
conducted at Wayne State University’s Walter P. Reuther Library, the University of Michigan’s Bentley Historical
Library, and the City of Detroit’s unofficial document repository. These materials enable a close reading of how
alternate senses of Detroit’s futurity are produced, how they move against one another, and the political work
they perform.
In drawing attention to how futurity settles affairs in the present, the paper makes the case for explicit and
critical engagement with the temporal dynamics of planning practice which tend to be left implicit or ignored. A
concern for the future is intrinsic to planning. Yet professional efforts often strive to anticipate the ‘future of’
urban processes as though future housing or transportation patterns exist independently of predictions,
strategies, dreams, fears, or prejudices. There is thus a risk of losing sight of the ‘looping effect’ [3] through which
futurity functions simultaneously as a rationale and a cause for action.1 The prophetic neighborhood analyses
conducted by the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation in the 1930s, for example, undoubtedly influenced later
patterns of residential blight. As Buzz Bissinger puts it, “by predicting the obsolescence of so much of the city,
they had guaranteed it; by promoting the promised land of the suburbs, they had guaranteed it” [4]. In this
paper, I attempt to trace the way such forces operate and evaluate their consequences for urban redevelopment.
References
 Krumholz, N. and Forester, J. (1990) Making Equity Planning Work: Leadership in the Public Sector.
Philadelphia: Temple
 Peattie, L. (1987) Planning, Rethinking Ciudad Guayana. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
 Anderson, B. and Adey, P. (2012) Future Geographies, Environment and Planning A, 44, pp. 1529- 1535.
 Bissinger, B. (1997) A Prayer for the City, New York: Vintage, p. 212

Abstract Index #: 616
THE UNFULFILLED TASK OF PLANNING: CITIZENSHIP, TEMPORALITY AND ETHICS
Abstract System ID#: 726

Pre-organized Session: Can Planning Change the World?
HATUKA, Tali [Tel Aviv University] hatuka@post.tau.ac.il
How does planning theory address citizens and non-citizens in a place? Does planning practice need -- and can it
develop -- updated strategies to address the dynamic of immigration in planning schemes? Thus far, planning
practice has not addressed the concept of citizenship directly but rather obliquely through the adaptation of the
notion of inclusion and participation from a nation-centered perspective. However, there is hardly any literature
that focuses on the problem of refugees, possibly because planning acts as an arm of the nation-state where the
immediate and temporal needs of refugees are not seen relevant within the long process of national and
municipal planning. Yet, the way citizenship is perceived and dealt with in the process of planning stands at the
heart of the discrepancies of spatial production. Thus, as long as planning does not take both a moral and a
pragmatic approach to the issue of citizenship, it fails to address justly the contemporary landscape of city, with
their multiethnic groups, migration and transnationalism. As such, it can only enhance the polarization of city
with their growing “shadow”/”gray” entities that exist at least partially outside of the gaze of state authorities
and city planners.
References
 Fainstein, S. S. (2010) The just city (Ithaca, Cornell University Press).
 Friedman, J. (2000) The Good City: in Defense of Utopian Thinking, International Journal of Urban and
Regional Research 24 (2), pp.460-472.
 Cresswell, T. (2009) The prosthetic citizen: New geographies of citizenship, in: D. E. Davis and J. Go (Eds)
Political Power and Social Theory, 20 (Emerald Group Publishing Limited), pp.259-273.
 Harvey, D. (2006) The Limits to Capita (London, New York, Verso).
 Soja, E. W. (2010) Seeking spatial justice (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press).

Abstract Index #: 617
THE MORALITY OF URBAN DESIGN: TOWARD AN ETHICAL STANDARD FOR CITY-MAKING
Abstract System ID#: 757
Pre-organized Session: Can Planning Change the World?
RYAN, Brent [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] bdr@mit.edu
Global urban design projects are often constructed in political environments where human rights, labor laws, and
life safety standards are insufficient or ignored. Designers have abjured responsibility and shifted the moral
burden to others. Urban design lacks ethical standards to assess the moral quality of city-making: an
unacceptable situation if one values democracy, pluralism, and freedom. Toward developing such a standard I
examine the moral standards for two ‘public goods’. The first, sites of conscience, are architectural or landscape
sites associated with reprehensible historical activities such as slavery. Sites of conscience use three strategies,
memorialization, cancellation, or reutilization, to acknowledge (or omit) their problematic past. The second,
conflict products, are commodities whose origin is morally problematic, ranging from workplace abuses to
unsustainable harvesting to animal cruelty. Through voluntary standards, the moral risk of these products is
easily communicated to consumers, permitting consumer action like boycotts, or simply enhanced awareness
and choice. In a world with varying levels of civil society, rule of law and state legitimacy, a more ethical urban
design will by necessity incorporate the moral standards applied to sites of conscience and conflict goods, and
perhaps develop additional, disciplinary autonomous standards as well.

Abstract Index #: 618
THE EMERGING UTOPIAN THEORIES OF THE URBAN JUSTICE AND THEIR LAGGING PLANNING PRACTICE
Abstract System ID#: 788
Pre-organized Session: Can Planning Change the World?

JABAREEN, Yosef [Technion - Israel Institute of Technology] jabareen@technion.ac.il
The recently resurrected theories of the "right to the city" and the "just city" represent new paths for scholars in
the disciplines of planning, urban studies, and the social sciences seeking to address the injustices, insecurity,
poverty, and inequalities of contemporary city. Numerous theorists have contributed to the emerging
knowledge in this critical field, which explores the intersection of rights, citizenship, and city. At the heart of this
paper stands the question of whether recent urban_planning practices follow these normative theories of justice
and human rights. In other words, do contemporary city plans reflect the emerging normative discourse of
justice? An examination of seven recent inclusive and master plans of developed and underdeveloped city
around the world took place in order to address these questions. These city include New York City, London,
Paris, Moscow, Delhi, Amman, and Beijing. The main conclusion of this study suggests that planning practices are
extremely lagging behind the emerging theories of justice. Moreover, it seems that each field of both practices
and theories plays in different and disconnected planes. Almost, they do not interact but at the very margin. In
this paper, we are looking for the lacking framework that have the power to bring theories and practices under
one plane. A plane that induces normative planning theories infiltrate the ethics of planning practices.

Abstract Index #: 619
ILDEFONSO CERDà AND PATRICK GEDDES: (RE)EXAMINING city AS COMPLEX system
Abstract System ID#: 814
Individual Paper
IVERSEN, Michael [University of Illiniois at Chicago] miversen@uic.edu
About 50 years ago, Jane Jacobs argued in The Death and Life of Great American city (1961) that city happen
to be “problems of organized complexity”, comprised of many factors varying simultaneously and in
interconnected ways. While city have traditionally been the province of urban planners, since Jacobs’ treatise
there have been only intermittent studies of city being understood as complex, adaptive and dynamical
systems. Today, planning theory remains slow in embracing complexity theory in order to understand the
seemingly disparate flux and cyclic processes of energy, materials, information and costs of an urban system.
Jacobs asked, “Why have city not, long since, been identified, understood and treated as problems of organized
complexity?” It is the intent of this paper to respond to this question by (re)examining the past, in the form of a
comparative analysis of two visionaries that viewed city as complex system; Patrick Geddes (50 years prior to
Jacobs), and Ildefonso Cerdà (50 years prior to Geddes).
In following the theoretical thread for a synthesis between urban_planning and the science of complexity, the
path leads upstream through Ian McHarg, Lewis Mumford, Raymond Unwin, Ebenezer Howard and eventually to
the riverhead known as Patrick Geddes (1854 – 1932). As a botanist, sociologist, geographer, and town planner,
Geddes’ planning concepts were derived from geographical and biological principles. Another earlier attempt to
synthesize planning and complexity is found in the work of Ildefonso Cerdà (1815 – 1876). Cerdà viewed the city
the same way a functional biologist views biological processes; that is, in terms how something is developed and
functions.
While the paths of Cerdà and Geddes do not directly intertwine, they do share in common certain aspects for use
in a comparative study. Each had a primary publication which defined their planning theory, and each applied
their theory to an iconic public plan for a particular city. Cerdà’s primary work was Teoría General de la
Urbanización, the General Theory of Urbanization (1867). Geddes’ primary work was city in Evolution (1915).
Cerdà’s primary theoretical application was with the City of Barcelona, in the form of a master plan for the city
extension known as the Eixample / Enscanche. Geddes applied much of his theoretical work within the City of
Edinburgh.
This comparative study between Cerdà and Geddes, as it relates to complexity theory, is boundaried within the
following two parameters. Firstly, from a broadscope perspective, an explanation of the planners theoretical
systems is provided within the context and trajectory of their times. Secondly, from a narrowscope perspective,

the study resides primarily with the unique ability of Cerdà and Geddes to derive planning theory from a
synthesis of social and natural sciences, and more specifically, with that of complexity theory. And while there
was not a direct relationship between Cerdà and Geddes, they were familiar, or shared relationships, with other
notable writers, scholars and scientists of their time, who serve as a means of indirect reflection for comparative
purpose. It is through these various lenses that the following comparative analysis will be assisted.
Relative to today’s reductionist disciplinary research, generalists such as Cerdà and Geddes had a unique vantage
point to view the world as greater than the sum of its reduced parts. Relevant to this year’s ACSP conference
theme of ‘Justice and the City’, this paper (re)examines the past for insight on future city as complex system.
Both Cerda and Geddes were humanists, and their theories were intended to result in the ultimate egalitarian
city. The intent of both Cerdà and Geddes was to improve living conditions within the city in reaction to the
adverse  impact of the Industrial Revolution. Their separate paths were similar in that they embraced scientific
inquiry to seek a new model for urban_planning that viewed city as “problems of organized complexity”.
References
 Batty, Michael. 2007. city and complexity: Understanding city with cellular automata, agent-based
models, and fractals. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
 Geddes, Patrick. 1915. city in evolution: An Introduction to the town planning movement and to the
study of civics. London: Williams & Norgate.
 Jacobs, Jane. 1961. The Death and life of great American city. New York: Random House.
 Soria y Puig, Arturo, and Ildefonso Cerdá. 1999. Cerdá: The Five bases of the general theory of
urbanization. With a foreword by Albert Serratosa. Madrid: Electa.
 Welter, Volker. 2002. Biopolis: Patrick Geddes and the city of life. With a foreword by Iain Boyd White.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Abstract Index #: 620
KNOWLEDGE OF WHAT, ACTION FOR WHOM: REFLECTIONS ON THE ROLE OF POLITICS IN PLANNING PRACTICE
Abstract System ID#: 861
Pre-organized Session: Can Planning Change the World?
DAVIS, Diane [Harvard University] ddavis@gsd.harvard.edu
This paper argues that the biggest challenge for planners who seek to link the “is” and “ought” lies in their
willingness and capacity to understand existent power structures and their malleability. Using materials drawn
from case study research on the role of politics in enabling and constraining sustainable urban development
(through the lens of housing and transportation policy in a variety of city around the world), I suggest that
strategic leveraging of political institutions and practices is central to the achievement of efficacious planning
outcomes. This claim not only has implications for planning education (i.e. justifying a call for the teaching of
politics in planning program). It also suggests that planners must become more cognizant of the ways their
normative aims can be framed politically so as to unite political actors in the state and civil society behind
effective action strategies that maximize shared goals of justice and equity.

Abstract Index #: 621
BEYOND THE NEOLIBERAL TURN IN PLANNING: REVISITING THE MISSION OF urban_planning AS A CORE
GOVERNMENT FUNCTION
Abstract System ID#: 866
Individual Paper
JANSSEN JANSEN, Leonie [University of Amsterdam] l.b.janssen-jansen@uva.nl
Cities change continuously in a context of shifting state-market-civil relations and accelerating dynamics of
socioeconomic and demographic processes. The current dominant neo-liberal drivers for growth and investment

constantly challenge and redefine societal arrangements. Deregulation, privatization and commercialization of
government activities are encouraged for economic urban progress. Public assets are sold and reinforced by
austerity policy and decentralized funding. Moreover as result of the New Public Management public
administrations’ neo-liberal emphasis on efficiency and effectiveness public goods and services are increasingly
contracted out to the market. This has resulted in an ongoing debate that city are becoming more inequitable
and unsustainable. What is the role for planning in this process?
The neo-liberal turn in planning is characterized by a push for increased flexibility of planning procedures.
Debates over reforming the planning system and modernizing government agendas often end by abolishing part
of the planning system in favor of further deregulation. Currently across the world a trend for simplification
and/or mergers of regulations to stimulate growth and decrease bureaucracy is visible. Although in cases where
regulation is deemed obsolete and/or unworkable and only perceived as unnecessary bureaucracy it does make
sense to enable people to think, plan and develop ‘outside the box’, it is important to avoid throwing the baby
out with the bath water. The regulatory frameworks and processes reflect normative values and ideas to achieve
socially and environmently sustainable outcomes. urban_planning is about steering change while meeting core
social, environment and economic policy imperatives to manage end direct the changing city.
The notion of fairness and justness hardly receives attention on neo-liberal agendas. However, equity issues and
the pursuit to achieve just  land_use outcomes – environmently sustainable and socially equitable outcomes -are the key challenges planning system should address.
This paper argues that the key focus in urban_planning always has been but also continues to be the need to
balance public goods values with short-term investment opportunities of the market. Planning is – and will be – a
core government function and an important public intervention process for debating the politics of  land_use. It
should ensure equity in decision-making processes to get to equitable outcomes, instead of becoming just as
subservient to bottom-up development demands. Planning processes might cause delays and/or frustrations but
it should not be ignored that the aim is to provide important social and environment community benefits. Yet
due to the neo-liberal turn in planning across the world planners and politician seems to have forgotten how to
think – and discuss – about values. The paper concludes with a call to re-include more substantive debate on
values in planning to counterbalance the growing focus on tools and process.
References
 Marquand D (2004) Decline of the Public: The Hollowing Out of Citizenship. Cambridge, Polity Press
 Mazzucato, M. (2013) The Entrepreneurial State, Debunking public vs. private sector myths. London:
Anthem Press.
 Warner, M.E. & Clifton, J. (2013) Marketisation, public services and the city: the potential for Polanyian
counter movements, Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society 7/1, 45-61.
 Geddes M N (2011) Neoliberalism and local governance: Global contrasts and research priorities. Policy
and Politics, 39, 3, 439 – 447.
 Lloyd, MG (2015 forthcoming), Provenance, Planning and new Parameters, Amsterdam, University of
Amsterdam.

Abstract Index #: 622
FARE EVASION: JUSTICE AT THE GATE
Abstract System ID#: 869
Individual Paper
PERROTTA, Alexis [Columbia University] ap130@columbia.edu
Transportation planning scholars interested in equity have called for a greater focus on “captive riders”: those
who rely on transit and have very low or unsteady incomes (Grengs 2005, Garrett and Taylor 1999, Pucher and
Renne 2003). “Captive riders” can be overlooked because, in aggregate, they will ride regardless of the fare or
other conditions. This disaggregate, qualitative study explores captive riders’ travel behavior at perhaps its most
marginal moment: fare evasion. It finds that “captive riders” may resort to fare evasion on occasion, and do so

from both inability to pay and a sense of justice. Using qualitative interviews with 25 low income New Yorkers,
and 15 social service providers and transit advocates, this paper finds that fare evasion and its consequences are
changing as fare payment becomes more remote and seamless. It is found that many riders expect bus drivers to
allow them to ride, from time to time, with insufficient cash payment. Fare evasion on bus rapid transit, which
uses an honor system, is enforced by the police rather than at the discretion of the bus driver. The authority
which would allow an occasional fare beater to access the system with little money is thereby removed from a
potentially sympathetic actor to one who is punitive. Fare beaters on the bus are changed as a result, from riders
accepting a kind favor from a driver, to nervous criminals hoping not to be caught. In addition, riders often deem
fare beating justified and help others beat the fare when they can. The finding belies a sense of belonging in the
transit system and reiterates expectation of universal access to collectively consumed public goods and, more
broadly, public space. Riders may consider the fare to be a reasonable gating mechanism, however their right to
this part of the city supersedes their obligation to pay.
References
 Garrett, M., and B. Taylor. "Reconsidering Social Equity in Public Transit." Berkeley Planning Journal 13
(1999): 6-27.
 Grengs, Joe. "The abandoned social goals of public transit in the neoliberal city of the USA." City 9.1
(2005): 51-66.
 Pucher, John, and John L. Renne. "Socioeconomics of Urban Travel: Evidence from the 2001 NHTS."
Transportation Quarterly 57 3 (2003): 49-77.

Abstract Index #: 623
THE LASTING IMPACT OF “POP-UPS”: TEMPORARY URBAN REVITALIZATION AS CIVIC ENGAGEMENT
Abstract System ID#: 876
Individual Paper
JOHNSON ASHLEY, Amanda [Boise State University] amandaashley@boisestate.edu
Communicating an urban vision is central to the practice of planning. Throughout history, policymakers,
practitioners and other urbanists have expressed planning ideas to the public through photographs, models,
exhibits, and brochures. By the late 20th century, criticisms of top-down, expert-driven planning that embraced
highly technical plans and ignored community concerns led to new participation methods that helped the public
express their own ideas. These included charrettes, focus groups and, more recently, social media and data
visualization. One relatively new means of communicating an urban vision is through so-called “pop-up” projects,
which are intentional temporary revitalization strategies that can last from a few hours to a few years. Pop-ups
involve diverse groups who occupy urban spaces for various purposes, including proposing alternative futures or
protesting urban policy. Such grassroots interventions move beyond traditional placemaking in their attempt to
influence urban development outcomes. Pop-ups take on many forms including: parklets, seedbombs, ciclovias
and guerilla wayfinding. Evidence remains mixed about whether pop-ups, which are a form of civic engagement
often occurring outside of traditional planning boundaries, have any lasting influence urban policy or planning.
Thus, I ask: (1) to what extent do pop-ups function as an unrecognized form of urban civic engagement and (2)
how successfully do these temporary revitalization strategies change urban development outcomes? I use a
national survey of 150 organizations that employ pop-up projects to influence urban policy. Survey targets
represent a broad spectrum of project types, geographical locations, and organizational structures. The findings
show that pop-ups excel as a form of civic engagement and inclusionary participation to attract new stakeholders
to urban_planning discourse. By initiating a highly visible and aesthetic demonstration, pop-ups educate the
public about urban issues, illustrate to policy makers differing opinions of urban investment, and put forth an
alternative vision for the future of city. While these projects are often successful at rallying the public, they
have mixed results when it comes to effecting lasting change in urban development practices. In part, this reflects
the planning profession’s inability to support and institutionalize such “urban flux” (Hack 2011) through policy
and regulations. Additionally, pop-up leaders have difficulty breaking through traditional participation barriers
and remain outside formal urban decision-making processes for planning and development. Because temporary

pop-ups are such a new phenomenon, it will take time for their advocates to create and catalyze long-term
change and for planners and urban policymakers to determine how to incorporate these projects as a form of
public participation. This research offers insight for the planning profession about a new, grassroots method of
communicating an urban vision wherein diverse participates express their preferences about urban development.
The research also suggests that planners will need to become nimble in incorporating new forms of engagement,
whether it is pop-ups, social media, or the next idea just over the horizon.
References
 Colomb, Claire. 2012. “Pushing the Urban Frontier: Temporary Uses of Space, City Marketing, and the
Creative City Discourse in 2000s Berlin.” Journal of Urban Affairs 34 (2): 131–52.
 Hack, Gary. 2011. “Urban Flux.” In Companion to Urban Design, edited by Anastasia Loukaitou-Sideris
and Tridib Banerjee. London; New York: Routledge.
 Hou, Jeffrey. 2010. Insurgent Public Space Guerrilla Urbanism and the Remaking of Contemporary city.
Hoboken (NJ): Taylor & Francis.
 Iveson, Kurt. 2013. “Cities Within the City: Do-It-Yourself Urbanism and the Right to the City.”
International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 37 (3): 941–56.
 Silver, Hilary, Allan Scott, and Yuri Kazepov. 2010. “Participation in Urban Contention and Deliberation.”
International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 34 (3): 453–77.

Abstract Index #: 624
EQUITY PLANNING IN LEGACY city
Abstract System ID#: 889
Individual Paper
THOMAS, June [University of Michigan] thomasju@umich.edu
Equity planning ties in well with this year’s conference theme. The concept built on a dialogue about theory
begun by Paul Davidoff, in the 1960s; equity planning evolved from advocacy planning. Cleveland’s Norman
Krumholz, his colleagues, and allied scholars (Krumholz and Forester 1990, Krumholz and Clavel 1994)
championed the idea of attending to the interests of the disadvantaged as a value framework for professional
planning decisions. For some city, however, practical difficulties have made it very difficult to pursue the
original concept of equity planning as a framework for action. In city with severe decline in population and tax
base, “legacy city,” both the ability to influence decision-making and the “pie” of municipal benefits may have
shrunk markedly. Some recent works (Fainstein 2010, Marcuse 2009) have called for enhanced planning for
social justice, a broader term, but have not clarified how to address this concept in such city. This paper argues
that equity planning is still useful as a strategy for social justice, but needs adjustment in highly-constrained
situations. Our purpose is to begin to delineate a potential framework of action for legacy-city planners who face
difficult social, economic, and fiscal circumstances.
The approach of this theory-driven paper is historical but based as well on a case study of contemporary planning
in a severely-constrained city. First we will explore historical material on the nature of advocacy and equity
planning and describe the original proposals’ connection with distressed city contexts. Then we will compare
traditional definitions of equity planning with the newer “social justice in planning” literature to discern key
theoretical similarities and differences. Finally, using a case city, Detroit, and a specific process, planning for the
strategic plan Detroit Future City, we will report on a series of at least 16 interviews with knowledgeable
observers, 14 of whom were planning or allied professionals. These interviews showed that planners in this
distressed city have remarkable resiliency and have made notable efforts, not all unsuccessful, to support equity
planning or planning for social justice in Detroit. However, analysis of their comments and experiences suggests
that certain specific aspects of the traditional understanding of equity planning need revision in contemporary
contexts such as theirs, particularly concerning the need for alternative employment contexts and the
importance of dialogue (Fischer 2009).

The relevance of this paper is that planning is still operating in legacy city, but under much different
circumstances than planning in more prosperous locales or even in those same legacy city when times were not
so hard, in previous decades. Nevertheless, even with constraints, planners may still be informed by social justice
inclinations and they may aspire to the concept of equity planning. We need a better understanding of ways that
the original concept of equity planning connected with the conditions of the city of Cleveland in the 1970s; ways
that some planners working in city even more distressed than 1970s Cleveland have adjusted to circumstances
and yet kept their essential principles; and implications for how we teach about, understand, and promote equity
planning. We will end the paper with a proposal for definitional adjustments for the theory of equity planning in
today’s distressed “legacy” city, with specific suggestions for alterations in practice, particularly the ways we
train social activists in this tradition.
References
 Fainstein, S. 2010. The Just City. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
 Fischer, F. 2009. Discursive Planning: Social Justice as Discourse. In Connolly, J., Novy, J., Olivo, I.,
Potter, C., & Steil, J. Searching for the Just City: Debates in Urban Theory and Practice. London:
Routledge.
 Krumholz, N. and Clavel, P. 1994. Reinventing city: Equity Planners Tell their Stories. Philadelphia:
Temple University Press.
 Krumholz, N., and Forester, J. 1990. Making equity planning work. Philadelphia: Temple University
Press.
 Marcuse, P. 2009. “From Justice Planning to Commons Planning.” In Connolly, J., Novy, J., Olivo, I.,
Potter, C., & Steil, J. Searching for the Just City: Debates in Urban Theory and Practice. London:
Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 625
JUST OUTCOMES AND THE “GOOD” CITY?: BALANCING POLICY OBJECTIVES OF THE FEDERAL SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITIES INITIATIVE
Abstract System ID#: 916
Individual Paper
GOUGH, Meghan [Virginia Commonwealth University] mzgough@vcu.edu
Theories in planning respond in part to the challenges of practice, producing guidance to planners on the process,
shape and character of the “good” city. Among others, contemporary planning theory discourse presents the
communicative model, the new urbanist approach and the political economy model, each presenting differing
conceptions of a good city: one that prioritizes a democratic process, one that prioritizes spatial livability, and one
that prioritizes justice (Grant 2006). A key tension underlying these differences in the principal normative
standards for planning is the debate about in whether the “good” city is realized based on the presence of an
inclusive planning process or an equitable outcome (Fainstein 2010). Furthermore, should planners intervene in a
planning process to advocate for normative concepts of the “just” city?
In 2008, the Obama Administration was the first to promote and pursue a set of policy principles related to
sustainable development and livability, effectively defining the nature of the “good” city for U.S. local and
regional governments (Gough 2015). Through a partnership between HUD, DOT, and EPA, the Sustainable
Communities Initiative (SCI) provided grants in 2010 and 2011 to support regional planning and development
efforts that coordinate housing, transportation and other infrastructure investments to reduce energy
consumption and environment degradation and expand resident access to employment. Helping to address
limited attention to equity in sustainability initiatives across U.S. comminuty (Opp and Saunders 2013), the
three agencies sought to enable more just outcomes by removing federal regulatory and policy barriers to
sustainable development in distressed area. In addition, funding was targeted to regions that prioritized efforts
in economically distressed area, and which detailed inclusive processes to engage underserved or marginalized
populations.

Using survey data, interviews and document analysis, this paper analyzes the process and the outcome of the
three-year SCI regional planning grant in four funded regions. Details associated with the planning process,
context and resulting plans in the four regions are examined to discern success in realizing the nature of the
“good” city prescribed through SCI, and the degree to which the just outcomes were possible. Implications for
regional sustainable planning and policy are discussed.
References
 Fainstein, Susan S. 2010. The just city: Cornell University Press.
 Gough, Meghan Z. 2015. "Reconciling Livability and Sustainability: Conceptual and Practical Implications
for Planning." Journal of Planning Education and Research. Forthcoming
 Grant, Jill. 2006. Planning the good community: new urbanism in theory and practice: Taylor & Francis.
 Opp, Susan M. and Kyle L. Saunders. 2013. "Pillar Talk: Local Sustainability Initiatives and policy in the
United States—Finding Evidence of the “Three E’s”: Economic Development, environment Protection,
and Social Equity." Urban Affairs Review 49(5):678-717.

Abstract Index #: 626
PUBLIC AT A PRICE: USER FEES AND ACCESS TO PUBLIC SWIMMING SPACES IN NEW YORK CITY
Abstract System ID#: 919
Individual Paper
ADIV, Naomi [Portland State University] nadiv@pdx.edu, presenting author, primary author
WOLFPOWERS, Laura [University of Pennsylvania] lwpowers@gc.cuny.edu
A long history of ambivalence over whether or not to charge a fee for entry surrounds the municipal bathing
project (including different kinds of pools and bathhouses) in New York City. In the second half of the nineteenth
century, many of the reformers who promoted bath houses believed that a fee for entry, of even a small amount
would teach very poor New Yorkers, mostly immigrants, the value of state or philanthropic provision of the
baths. Beginning in the 1930s, when 11 enormous outdoor pools were constructed under parks commissioner
Robert Moses, the reason for charging a fee—or at least the official line—was most often to balance the Parks
Department budget. However, the nominal fee continued to operate for many years after its monetary value had
been minimized. In the 1980s, the Parks department abolished the entry fee for outdoor pools in the summer,
but later imposed a fee for indoor pools at municipal recreation centers (many of them formerly free
bathhouses.)
In this paper, we probe the function and meaning of user fees as a mechanism of access to urban public space.
We use the case of admissions policy for swimming pools and public recreation centers in New York City from
the 1970s to the present to ask how the imposition of fees affects people’s access to recreational space, the
distribution of that space among constituencies, and those constituencies’ sense of belonging in the city. In the
process, we interrogate the multiple logics behind recreation user fees, from rationing under scarcity to
recovering costs under austerity to safeguarding citizens’ morality. In problematizing the access fee, our paper
addresses both theoretical questions about the nature of public space and practical ones about how municipal
administrators govern amidst competing pressures to serve, develop and regulate urban residents.
References
 Low, S. and N. Smith. 2006. The Politics of Public Space. New York: Routledge.
 Madden, D. 2010. “Revisiting the End of Public Space: Assembling the Public in an Urban Park.” City and
Community, 9:2.
 Newman, J., & Clarke, J. (2009). Publics, Politics and Power: Remaking the Public in Public Services.
London: Sage.
 Renner, A. (2008). A Nation That Bathes Together: New York City's Progressive Era Public Baths. Journal
of the Society of Architectural Historians, 67(4), 504-531.
 Shepard, B., & Smithsimon, G. (2011). The Beach Beneath the Streets: Contesting New York City's Public
Spaces. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.

Abstract Index #: 627
ECOLOGICAL, PLANNING, THEORY
Abstract System ID#: 939
Individual Paper
ROTHFEDER, Robin [University of Utah] r.rothfeder@utah.edu
There is a growing need for clear understanding and effective application of an ecological approach to urban and
regional planning and design. Over half of the global human population now lives in city (UN DESA, 2013, p. 89),
and humans now find ourselves in an unprecedented position: along with long-recognized ecological  impact at
local and regional scales, we have become the primary drivers of fundamental changes to Earth processes,
including nutrient cycles, resource cycles, biodiversity, ocean chemistry, and climate patterns (Sayre et al., 2013,
p. 339). Scholars across disciplines show a growing awareness that human well-being, social justice, economic
stability, urban form, natural resource use, environment quality, and ecosystem health are not separate issues,
but a system of interconnected, interdependent problems and opportunities.
As these traditional dualisms—human vs. nonhuman, built vs. natural—dissolve, scholars face a transdisciplinary
landscape that is increasingly compelling but also increasingly challenging. As Miller et al. explain, “the
disciplinary structure of knowledge itself” can inhibit communication between different intellectual domains,
which value different forms of knowledge and produce those knowledges in different ways (2008, p.4).
This is the challenge for the emerging field of ecological planning, which by its very name takes place at the
interface of human system and ecosystems. Especially difficult is the development of a transdisciplinary
theoretical language and framework, including critical reflections on history, politics, and power, as well as
explicit formulations of normative principles (Wilkinson, 2012, p. 149). At the same time, as ecological planners
have struggled to produce more rigorous theorizing, planning theorists have faced a parallel challenge: the call to
return a sense of materiality, substance, and realism to a body of thought from which “the ecological crisis… is
still surprisingly absent” (Harrison, 2014, p. 66).
This paper argues that there is potential for mutual gains between ecological planning and planning theory, with
each field’s stronger points helping to bolster the other’s weaker points. The paper further argues that
interdisciplinary literature from the environment humanities provides the language and analytical content
needed to realize these mutual gains, while also benefiting from more direct exposure to the planning field. I
show that the synergies between these three domains add up to more than the sum of their parts, or of any two
considered without the third. I highlight those synergies, furthering the capacity for transdisciplinary
collaboration both within and outside of the planning discipline.
References
 United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UN DESA), 2013. World Economic and Social
Survey 2013: Sustainable Development Challenges.
 Sayre, N. F., Kelty, R., Simmons, M., Clayton, S., Kassam, K. A., Pickett, S. T., & Chapin III, F. S. (2013).
Invitation to Earth Stewardship. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 11(7), 339-339.
 Miller, T. R., Baird, T. D., Littlefield, C. M., Kofinas, G., Chapin III, F. S., & Redman, C. L. (2008).
Epistemological pluralism: reorganizing interdisciplinary research. Ecology and Society, 13(2), 46.
 Wilkinson, C. (2012). Social-ecological resilience: Insights and issues for planning theory. Planning
Theory, 11(2), 148-169.
 Harrison, P. (2014). Making Planning Theory Real. Planning Theory, 13, 65-81.

Abstract Index #: 628
A LOGIC FRAMEWORK FOR RE-EXAMINING A LAND-USE POLICY
Abstract System ID#: 955

Individual Paper
BAHMAN TEYMOURI, Elham [The University of Auckland] ebah488@aucklanduni.ac.nz
Policy analysis is a complicated field grappled with complex social and political dimensions and problems. It is a
multi-faceted field which requires taking a self-critical position within public policy field. Therefore, policy analysis
has been a field where a multitude of methods and tools such as qualitative, quantitative, and discourse analysis
among others have developed (Enserink, Koppenjan, & Mayer, 2013). Yet, it needs to be opened to a wide variety
of different methods and the toolbox of policy analysis should be extended with new research tools (Fischer,
Miller, & Sidney, 2007).
Indeed, policy analysis includes contributions from different fields of knowledge such as political studies,
economics, and psychology, among others. This paper deploys a logic approach that has been inaugurated
initially in political studies by Laclau and Mouffe (1985); then, developed by their students including Glynos and
Howarth (2007) and entitled the Essex School of Discourse Analysis (ESDA). The method is not simply a Discourse
Analysis method that focuses on reading texts or considering the language of documents. Instead, a logic
approach has been applied in policy analysis to investigate how and under which political and social
circumstances, a particular policy logically supersedes all other alternatives. Based on ESDA, this paper deploys a
logic approach to critically analyse how three logics social, political and fantasmatic work to make possible a
practice of urban development in Iran within Tehran metropolitan area. Through an ontological investigation on
the status quo of  land_use policy, this paper scrutinises the logics that operate together to make possible a
practice of land development. This novel method is being deployed for the first time in planning by the
researcher to explicate the logics which have created Parand as an extension within the Tehran metropolitan
area. Since ESDA is a problem-driven approach, the focus of the ontological investigation is on the logical
existence of the policy. It will be explained that the practice offers a neoliberal policy relied on the simplistic
rationality of demand and supply sides, serve market logic through land supply policy. Therefore, the status quo
of the policy overlooks complex logics of the practice.
To perform the research, the creation of Parand as a new development is categorised into four historical phases.
This categorisation assists the logic approach to explain how the practice of metropolitan extension operates as a
neoliberal policy through wide varieties of actors in order to respond to the demand for affordable housing. At
every phase, it will be explained how political and fantasmatic logics are associated with the social logic to make
the practice and to maintain it at both the social and psychological levels of different actors in the land
development process. Three logics of social, political, and fantasmatic analyse the  impact of different actors
including state, citizens, local institutions, as well as regulations upon the use of land. The paper suggests a new
and effective method of policy analysis in general and land-use policy in particular.
References
 Enserink, B., Koppenjan, J. M., & Mayer, I. (2013). A Policy Sciences View on Policy Analysis. In W. A. H.
Thissen, & W. E. Walker (Eds.), Public Policy Analysis (Vol. 179, pp. 11-40): Springer US.
 Fischer, F., Miller, G. J., & Sidney, M. S. (2007). Handbook of public policy analysis. Public administration
and public policy.
 Glynos, J., & Howarth, D. R. (2007). Logics of critical explanation in social and political theory. London;
New York: Routledge.
 Laclau, E., & Mouffe, C. (1985). Hegemony and socialist strategy: towards a radical democratic politics.
London: Verso.

Abstract Index #: 629
THE POLITICIZATION OF PLANNING THEORY AND THE DE-POLITICIZATION OF PLANNING PRACTICE
Abstract System ID#: 1005
Individual Paper
ZANOTTO, Juliana [University of California, Irvine] jzanotto@uci.edu

Post-modernist planning theory depicts planning as a political activity. Contrary to the modernist notion of
planning as an objective practice in which neutral professionals employ technical expertise to address urban
issues, post-modernists have politicized planning theory. In an attempt to more accurately describe the realities
of planning practice, post-modernists strive to account for power structures in which planning is embedded
(Baum 1996).
The investigation of what planners do and the planning theories that derive from such studies tend to focus on
planners working for the public sector and/or for the advancement of progressive goals (Hoch 2011, Forester
2009). Ideally, these professionals are expected to utilize their technical expertise to carry out a series of
activities aiming at the community’s wellbeing. In theory, planners in public agencies at the local, metropolitan,
or state levels serve the public’s interest. While these claims are controversial and have been contested (Yiftachel
1998) the characterization of planners as well intentioned and planning as a progressive practice is widespread.
This paper addresses an important limitation of current planning theories by analyzing the work of planners in
the private sector who are involved in the creation of elitist enclaves. The work of the professionals who were
observed and interviewed encompasses the development of feasibility studies, design plans, construction
drawings, descriptive memorandum, and marketing material for upscale gated comminuty in Brazil. The
analyses of qualitative data utilized a practice theory lens to uncover what planners do, how they do what they
do, and how they make sense of their work.
Two findings stand out: the first relates to the planners’ use of discourse to convert regressive outcomes into
desirable and legitimate goals; the second is the planners’ attempt to portray their work as apolitical. This paper
focuses on the latter and unveils the mechanisms through which the de-politicization of planning practice occurs.
For instance, the observations presented here reveal that planners often refer to their work as objective,
technical, and neutral. Paradoxically, while acknowledging the role of power, politics, and negotiation in the
planning process, planners strive to portray themselves as service providers.
Thus, this paper contributes to the understanding of planning practices by shifting the objective of study from the
public to the private sector, from planning in developed countries to planning practices in the South, and from
planners’ involvement in the advancement of progressive goals to their role in perpetuating segregation.
References
 Baum, Howell. 1996. Practicing planning theory in a political world. In Explorations in Planning Theory,
ed. Seymour Mandelbaum, Luigi Mazza, and Robert Burchell, 365-382, New Bruisswick, NJ: Center for
Urban Policy Research, Rutgers.
 Forester, John. 2009. Dealing with Differences: Dramas of Mediating Public Disputes. New York, NY:
Oxford, University Press.
 Hoch, Charles. 1994. What Planners Do: Power, Politics, and Persuasion. Chicago, IL: American Planning
Association.
 Yiftachel, Oren. 1998. Planning and Social Control: Exploring the Dark Side. Journal of Planning Literature
12: 395-409.

Abstract Index #: 630
HOW BIG IS AN ACRE? AN INVESTIGATION INTO ORDINARY SPACE
Abstract System ID#: 1028
Individual Paper
STERNBERG, Ernest [University at Buffalo, SUNY] ezs@buffalo.edu
Since it is 43,560 square feet, the question may remind us of Homer Simpson’s question: “Quick Marge, how do
you dial 9-1-1?” Some theorists would sympathize with Homer: they understand space in terms of social and
historical categories—a concept for which Henri Lefebvre’s work is given as a prominent citation. The acre is, in

their view, historically generated, having originated in late Medieval England for regularizing feudal landholdings.
Many planners of theoretical bent embrace the idea that “spatiality” is a social and cultural product. To be sure,
thinkers of a more scientific frame would hold that that the acre has an empirical referent measurable through
well-established means; but spatial theorists will retort that the surveyors, land officials, etc. have in mind a
conceptual space that is technocratically defined. Is there, then, no such thing as an acre we can mutually
understand, across cultures? With historical illustrations of homely things, such as an acre, a rock, or a tree in the
distance, this article claims that we can indeed. The acre originates in the lived experience of the drover, who
found that his oxen could plow about one furlong in a stretch, and might accomplish four furlongs in a day; so it is
that an acre as a furlong times four rods. Though it is hard to now put oneself into the shoes of a drover of oxen,
it is possible through some effort to understand, or at least empathize with, his lived experience of space.
Perhaps ordinary things are, after all, universally accessible, to some satisfactory extent. If there can be an
ordinary-language theory of reasoning, perhaps there can also be a ordinary-space theory of spatial orientation.
It would hold that each competent and healthy adult, of whatever period and culture, can cultivate the sharable
experience of an acre, or a rock. There are, then, not specifically empirical universals but recoverable
experiential universals in the understanding of space. If so, we should be teaching our students not hyperskepticism about cross-cultural and cross-historical understanding, but rather the confidence by which to
resuscitate the nearly lost arts of appreciating our surroundings.
References
 Lefebvre, Henri, The Production of Space, Wiley, 1992
 Huth, John Edward, The Lost Art of Finding Our Way, Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2013
 Linklater, Andro, Measuring America, Walker, 2002
 Rosen, Stanley, The Elusiveness of the Ordinary, Yale University Press, 2002
 Stilgoe, John R., Outside Lies Magic, Walker, 1998

Abstract Index #: 631
FOOD SOVEREIGNTY AS ENTRY TO A NEW LAND: INSURGENCY, LINES OF FLIGHT, ASSEMBLAGES, AND
RHIZOMES
Abstract System ID#: 1045
Individual Paper
BORN, Branden [University of Washington] bborn@uw.edu, presenting author, primary author
ORTEGA, Elizabeth [FEEST] elizabeth@feestseattle.org
For the past several years, a dialogue has spread at ACSP about the relationship between planning and its
commonly practiced forms—relatively rational, communicative, and collaborative, the state, and non-state
organizing or autonomous planning. Two sessions in Philadelphia, one on planning and autonomy and another on
the application of the radical political theory of Deleuze and Guattari to planning (which was itself a follow-up to
a paper presented at ACSP-AESOP in Dublin) exemplify this growing discussion. This paper takes up that
conversation, building on the question of "what would planning according to Deleuze and Guattari look like?" Or,
read the other direction, what are the intersections of grassroots community resistance and insurgent planning
with the political theory of Deleuze and Guattari?
Critical of the state, and thus deeply suspicious about planning, Deleuze and Guattari provide important
questions for planners to consider, especially in the context of neoliberalism, corporatist globalization, and
virtually unrestricted campaign financing (in the US case). In this light, what can planners be expected to do,
when the state within which they are embedded essentially rejects many of the foundational claims to equity,
advocacy, and broad notions of the public good that are the bedrock of planning's ethics? Would such a
counterhegemonic planning be consistent with insurgent planning, planning consistent with Deleuze and
Guattari, or both?
Accordingly, this paper contrasts planning consistent with Deleuze and Guattari with insurgent planning, and uses
two cases embedded in critical food studies to demonstrate how and whether non-state actors acting both

autonomously and collectively might be examples of such practice. Through interviews and participant
observation it examines forms of indigenous agricultural and community governance practice in Oaxaca, Mexico,
and an example of food-based alternative education and youth empowerment in Seattle, Washington. In each
case there are examples of the rejection of dominant state (or state-like) structures in favor of more radically
democratic practice.
How might these be understood, both internally and in a more generalized sense? This paper argues that such
non-state activities are pervasive, important, and can be understood using the vocabulary and structural
principles provided by Deleuze and Guattari. They offer individual and community autonomy and empowerment,
and the ability to resist oppressive structures in meaningful ways. Ultimately, such efforts come back to a larger
question of the relevance and meaning of planning in contemporary society. They speak as well to possible
strategic ways of socially organizing to resist capitalistic state oppression and seek more socially just and
democratic outcomes, perhaps through planning.
References
 Growing Rhizomes: Planning, Deleuze & Guattari, and the Alternative Food Movement, Mark Purcell and
Branden Born. Paper presented at ACSP-AESOP 2013, under review at Urban Geography
 A New Land for Planning? Lessons from Deleuze and Guattari and Community-Based Food Projects,
Mark Purcell and Branden Born. Paper presented at ACSP 2014.
 Purcell, M. (2013). A New Land: Deleuze and Guattari and Planning. Planning Theory and Practice, 13(1):
20-38.
 Miraftab, F. (2009). Insurgent Planning: Situating Radical Planning in the Global South. Planning Theory,
8(1): 32-50.

Abstract Index #: 632
THE DILEMMA OF OPENNESS: CHALLENGES OF PLANNING IN OPEN SPACES AND comminuty
Abstract System ID#: 1046
Individual Paper
DE LA LLATA, Silvano [Cornell University] sad223@cornell.edu
This paper explores the challenges of planning in the context of open spaces and comminuty. An open space is
any space that (1) is permeable to potentially anyone who wants to participate in its development and (2) whose
inner functioning and relationship with its context are open to debate and therefore are in the process of
construction. Open space is also associated with the notion of autonomy and self-organization. Examples of
autonomous projects and open spaces include non-institutional neighborhood assemblies, Zapatista autonomous
municipalities, self-organized social centers, occupied factories as well as protest encampments and communes.
Open space should not be confused with public or outdoor space, as there could be open spaces in indoor or
private spaces (i.e. neighborhood assemblies, social centers); in the same way that some spaces that are visible
and accessible to anybody are sometimes regulated in a way that do not allow for self-organization.
The paper particularly focuses on analyzing the following dilemma: if spaces and comminuty remain open to
anyone, they can potentially grow in diversity and complexity, but compromising their initial coherence. On the
other hand, if space and community are bounded, then they keep coherence but cancel the possibility of
renovating themselves with external contributions. Thus, the question arises: exactly how much complexity can
open spaces and comminuty host without losing coherency? And moreover, how can spaces and comminuty
renovate themselves when their internal logics and discourses – even though provide coherency – become
obstacles for creativity and innovation? Interpreting how boundaries operate between a community and its
space, and its context is key to understanding this dilemma.
This dilemma is often present in planning processes in the context of autonomous comminuty, and
participatory, horizontal and direct democracy social movements. In a world in which social groups and spaces
are increasingly interconnected and interdependent (virtually and physically), and identity and physical

boundaries are blurred, the “dilemma of openness” becomes a crucial one to understand for planning theory and
practice.
Building on theories of autonomy (Chatterton, 2005, Lotringer, 2007) and the work of Deleuze & Guattari (1987)
(Hillier, 2005, Purcell, 2013), and drawing from fieldwork that examine the conflicts that arose in identity building
and place-making processes in the context of two social movements (i.e. the Spanish Indignados and Occupy Wall
Street), the objectives of this paper are (1) to explore the potential for innovation and creativity in planning
processes in the context of open spaces and autonomous projects, (2) to analyze the implications of opening
spaces of participation for the democratization of city-making and (3) to explore possibilities to transcend the
“dilemma of openness” in planning processes.
References
 Chatterton, P. (January 01, 2005). Making autonomous geographies: Argentina’s popular uprising and
the ‘Movimiento de Trabajadores Desocupados’ (Unemployed Workers Movement). Geoforum, 36, 5,
545-561.
 Deleuze, G., & Guattari, F. (1987). A thousand plateaus: Capitalism and schizophrenia. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
 Hillier, J. (2005). Straddling the post-structuralist abyss: Between transcendence and immanence?
Planning Theory, 4(3), 271–299.
 El, K. H., Lotringer, S., & Marazzi, C. (2007). Autonomia: Post-political politics. Los Angeles, CA:
Semiotext(e).
 Purcell, M. (2013). A new land: Deleuze and Guattari and planning. Planning Theory & Practice, 14(1),
20-38. doi:10.1080/14649357.2012.761279

Abstract Index #: 633
PLANNING, PROPERTY RIGHTS, AND THE TRAGEDY OF THE ANTICOMMONS: TEMPORARY USES IN PORTLAND,
CHICAGO, AND DETROIT
Abstract System ID#: 1069
Individual Paper
GEBHARDT, Matthew [Portland State University] mfg@pdx.edu
Over the past ten years, there has been a growing interest in the potential for temporary uses as a flexible
response to vacant lots and storefronts and a tool for encouraging revitalization. Much of this literature lacks a
theoretical framework for interpreting and understanding what is being observed. This paper attempts to expand
understanding of the temporary uses by using the Tragedy of the Anticommons and informality literatures to
explore how temporary uses have emerged as a potential solution to the tangled array of overlapping property
rights and regulatory regimes that have limited the redevelopment, rehabilitation, or reuse of underutilized
properties.
The paper first provides an explanation of the concepts of the Tragedy of the Anticommons and informality and
analyzes underuse of property and stalled revitalization using these theoretical lenses. Particular emphasis is
placed in the paper on the importance of the ownership of properties and the underlying logic of US planning and
regulatory regimes in both hindering the development of temporary uses and providing spaces (often informal)
for their creation. The second part uses these concepts to examine how actors have attempted to navigate the
ambiguous position of temporary uses within local planning regimes. Three examples – food carts in Portland,
Oregon, neighborhood markets in Chicago, Illinois, and pop-up shops in Detroit, Michigan – are used to highlight
specific challenges faced in trying to negotiate informality and the complicated task of navigating local  land_use
regulations, retail markets and political environments to successfully create viable activities that contribute to
revitalization.
The paper demonstrates that the fragmentation of property rights and the transaction costs associated with
coordination of actors whose participation is necessary to successfully realize a new development or use are vital

for explaining vacancy and underuse. It also demonstrates that temporary uses can be valuable contributors to
revitalization by circumventing or reducing property rights or coordination issues. However, the cases also reveal
some of the potential drawbacks of temporary uses including entrenchment of these uses frustrating attempts to
develop permanent uses (Portland), cooptation of temporary uses crowding out small entrepreneurs (Chicago)
and transition of temporary uses to permanent uses requiring substantial time and skill (Detroit). They also
reinforce that the process of formalizing informal uses can be a new avenue for the exercise of power and the
reallocation of resources.
References
 Bishop, Peter and Lesley Williams. 2012. The Temporary City. London: Routledge.
 Haydn, Florian and Robert Temel. 2006. Temporary Urban Spaces: Concepts for the Use of City Spaces.
Berlin: Birkhauser.
 Heller, Michael. 1998. “The Tragedy of the Anticommons: Property in the Transition from Marx to
Markets.” Harvard Law Review, 111: 621-688.
 Roy, Ananya. 2005. “Urban Informality: Towards an Epistemology of Planning.” Journal of the American
Planning Association, 71(2): 147-158.
 Porter, Libby. 2011. “Interface: Informality, the Commons and the Paradoxes for Planning: Concepts and
Debates for Informality and Planning.” Planning Theory & Practice 12 (1): 115-153.

Abstract Index #: 634
"COGNITIVE CONVERSION": MOBILIZING THE SOCIAL IMAGINARY FOR INSTITUTIONAL REFORM
Abstract System ID#: 1141
Individual Paper
MIAO, Tai-An [University of Hawaii at Manoa] taian@hawaii.edu
Planning processes concerned with institutional change send out ripples of uncertainty that may manifest in
multiple forms of resistance from subtle procedural barriers to outright political opposition. Transformation of
knowledge, attitudes, and allegiances among influential actors who inhabit these institutions can be critical in
building support for the implementation of reform. One strategy available to planners anticipating resistance
(Friedmann, 1997) is the design of planning processes that address likely challenges and prepare key stakeholders
for implementation. Recent planning research has highlighted linkages between cognitive and institutional
change, including cognition’s role in institutional design through the power of image and metaphor (Neuman,
2012) and consideration of the process by which institutional actors’ cognition, actions, and beliefs can change
through meaningful learning (Kim, 2012). This convergence may inform the design of planning processes that
leverage cognitive change to penetrate and alter the social imaginary that undergirds commonly accepted
understandings and practices (Taylor, 2002), thus opening the door to institutional transformation.
Exploring the nexus of change between individual and collective frameworks for meaning making and
institutional philosophies and practices is at the heart of this study. I pose three questions: (1) What is the role of
human cognition in institutional change? (2) Can planning play a role in institutional change by facilitating
processes aimed at the transformation of identity, ideas, and behaviors among individuals and groups within a
system? (3) What are the prospects and challenges of such an approach to planning?
This qualitative study explores the contemporary case of the Juvenile Detention Alternatives Initiative (JDAI), a
cross-sector social planning initiative that aims to transform the juvenile justice system using detention reform as
a starting point. Since 1992, the initiative has been implemented at nearly 200 sites nationally. JDAI approaches
institutional reform through a facilitated learning process designed to encourage changes in thinking, beliefs, and
actions among cohorts of key decision-makers from local level juvenile justice system.
Taking a grounded theory approach, I generate theory about the varying experiences of “cognitive conversion”
among JDAI participants and these actors’ resulting actions to advance or resist the implementation of reforms.
Utilizing theoretical sampling, I conducted in-depth interviews with 20 juvenile justice system collaborative

partners across 2 sites, including law enforcement, judges, probation officers, and community partners.
Additional data was collected through participant observation of planning activities and meetings as well as a
review of documents related to JDAI’s approach and specific institutional changes at the site level.
The cognitive focus in institutionalism as applied to this case of JDAI suggests that planners concerned with
institutional change pay attention to how philosophies, practices, and theories of practice can be transformed by
strategically mobilizing the social imaginary and “the release of transformative potential” (Healey 2007) among
influential stakeholders. The examination of this complex process highlights considerations that include the
strategic selection of planning participants, the facilitation of different pathways along which people’s ideas,
identities, and roles can evolve within a field of practice, the importance of peer-to-peer learning, and the
development of place-based reforms that reflect community culture and context.
References
 Friedmann, John. "Toward a non-Euclidian mode of planning." Journal of the American Planning
Association 59.4 (1993): 482-485.
 Healey, Patsy. "The new institutionalism and the transformative goals of planning." Institutions and
planning (2007):61-87.
 Kim, Annette. M. “The Evolution of the Institutional Approach in Planning.” The Oxford Handbook of
urban_planning (2012):69-86.
 Neuman, Michael. "The image of the institution: A cognitive theory of institutional change." Journal of
the American Planning Association 78.2 (2012):139-156.
 Taylor, Charles. "Modern social imaginaries." Public culture 14.1 (2002):91-124.

Abstract Index #: 635
UNIVERSITIES AS BOUNDARY OBJECTS: URBAN RESILIENCE AS DISCURSIVE ENCOUNTER
Abstract System ID#: 1161
Individual Paper
WESSELLS, Anne Taufen [University of Washington, Tacoma] atw5@u.washington.edu
What is the role of the community-engaged university, and planning program specifically, in the generation of
knowledge for urban development and governance? Universities increasingly define themselves as collaborative,
community-engaged, and service-oriented partners in urban development and governance. The scholarship of
engagement highlights important dimensions of such partnerships, including  land_use development capacity,
relationship-building with surrounding neighborhood, and normative, experiential education for students (Perry
& Weiwel, 2005; Rodin, 2007). Planning program have been at the forefront of this movement, often responding
to the need in adjacent comminuty for technical assistance such as design expertise, environment analysis
and remediation, and geospatial representation; as well as process-based support such as public outreach, plan
translation, and policy advocacy. In this paper, I argue that the intellectual and ideational role of the academy is
increasingly, if paradoxically important for a university that aspires to take its work “into the streets” (Rodin,
2007). Drawing on the work of planning scholars concerned with resilience – a literature with which I am
connected (Goldstein, Wessells, Lejano, & Butler, 2013), although not centrally involved – I take up the question
posed by Simin Davoudi: how are we to develop “the capacity to imagine alternative futures” (Davoudi,
2012)(303)? I use the work of planning theorists to introduce the concept of discursive resilience, and illustrate
the potentially transformative role of urban universities in its cultivation and enactment. First, I emphasize socialecological resilience as a deeply humanist, interpretive, and context-responsive disposition, as opposed to a
management outcome or set of scientific conditions to be operationalized. Second, I underscore the collaborative
and communicative dimensions of social-ecological resilience, and in particular the generative characteristics of
difference, uncertainty, and stress. Finally, I extend scholarship on boundary work in community-university
engagement (Weerts & Sandmann, 2010), collaborative networks (Lejano & Ingram, 2009), and collaborative
resilience (Quick & Feldman, 2014) to develop the post-structural and hybrid, socio-material insights of a
discourse-based framework. By characterizing the university as a boundary object in networks of urban
development and governance, I emphasize under-theorized aspects of its significance and potential in such

partnerships. The university is an ideational space, with the capacity to intentionally prioritize lines of inquiry,
forms of training, and modes of partnership. Such practices constitute the enactment of urban development and
governance discourses, where discourse is understood as not just a narrative and cognitive roadmap, but also as
a performance of socio-spatial ordering replete with acceptable behaviors, enabling technologies, and prescribed
intents. In its ability to convene and connect various publics, the knowledge-generation role of the communityengaged university includes the power to selectively invite, amplify, and reproduce – or to unsettle and
reconstitute – shared discourses of urban development and governance.

Abstract Index #: 636
THEORY OF PLANNER AS POLITICAL LEADER
Abstract System ID#: 1167
Individual Paper
KARKI, Tej Kumar [University of Liverpool] tej22karki@yahoo.com
Increasing number of literature suggest that planners need political skills to implement their planning goals. In
the absence of those skills, planning theorists argue that planners are marginalized, forced to do unethical
decisions, fired, and their best plans are distorted and sometimes unimplemented (Flyvbjerg, 1998; Grange,
2012; C. Hoch, 1988; C. Hoch & Cibulskis, 1987). The political skills that the planning theorists are advocating for
planners is not about winning elections to be political leaders. They are advocating planners to be skillful in
organizational politics within their given advisory role: staff-aides or civil-servants. Planners are advised to be
accountable to the people, transparent in planning process, and responsive to political sensitivity while carrying
out planning tasks (Read & Leland, 2010). Taking these ideas into considerations, planning theorists have coined a
number of political roles for planners. They are planners as bureaucrats, advocates, communicators and powerplayers.
However, experiences show that many planners as bureaucrats, advocates and communicators were unable to
influcene the powerfuls and politicians adamantly pursuing vested interests (Brooks, 2002; Flyvbjerg, 1998; C.
Hoch, 1988). Acting as bureaucrat insurgent or progressive civil servant was not easy by being employee of the
same institution. The issues here, was not about lack of political skills, but about lack of political authority to
make decisions (Brooks, 2002; Grange, 2012; C. Hoch, 1988). Planners’ dependence on politicians to make
decisions, and the politicians’ denials, resistance, and distortions of facts and rationality was a big barrier to make
better plans (B. Flyvbjerg, 2002). Had the planners sought for political positions and won, they would be free
from political resistance and be able to deliver better planning results. This paper presents case studies from the
US, Brazil and Nepal to show that the planners who joined active politics could make phenomenal contribution in
planning. On this basis, it further advocates that planners should take up political position as and when possible,
and acquire the power that is needed to make things happen. They need not be a prisoner of powerless,
advisory-role.
By joining politics, the planner would acquire both the power of idea and the power of decision making that is
required for materializing planning goals (Beckman, 1973). If one person has ‘power of knowledge’ (planner), and
the other person has ‘power of decision making’(politician) then there would be a chances of disagreements on
certain courses of action. But if a single person has both the power, he could make things happen as fast as he
wishes to. This two-in-one role of planner-politician is a unique power to make things happen. In this case, power
and rationality do not separate from each other, and fight as shown by (Flyvbjerg, 1998). Rather they unite for
better change.
Having said that, this article does not expect that all planners would join politics. city and towns need many
politically-skillful staff-aide planners, as suggested by planning theorists. By the same token, planners should not
also believe that they are by default staff-aides or civil-servants, and for this reason, they should not even
imagine the possibility of taking any political position. Those planners that see the probability of winning
elections should join politics because doing so gives them more power (to negotiate, educate, take action and
support) to implement their planning dreams. Planning theorists should admit that planner’s political-skills

without political-authority are not helpful in delivering results in many cases, and for this reason, they should
stop relying only on the planner’s political-skills, and also advocate for active political role of planners.
References
 Brooks, M. P. (2002). Planning Theory for Practitioners: American Planning Association.
 Hoch, C. (1994). What planners do: Power, politics, and persuasion: Planners Press Chicago.
 Hoch, C., & Cibulskis, A. (1987). Planning Threatened: A Preliminary Report of Planners and Political
Conflict. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 6(2), 99-107. doi: 10.1177/0739456x8700600205
 Flyvbjerg, B. (2002). Bringing Power to Planning Research: One Researcher's Praxis Story. Journal of
Planning Education and Research, 21(4), 353-366. doi: 10.1177/0739456x0202100401
 Grange, K. (2012). Shaping acting space: In search of a new political awareness among local authority
planners. Planning Theory. doi: 10.1177/1473095212459740

Abstract Index #: 637
FROM SMART city TO WISE city: ECOLOGICAL WISDOM AS A NEW BASIS FOR SUSTAINABLE URBAN
DEVELOPMENT
Abstract System ID#: 1204
Individual Paper
YOUNG, Robert [University of Texas at Austin] ryoung@utexas.edu
The epochal shift to the Age of city is characterized by the growing global urbanized majority and the increasing
material and political demands of that population within the context of ecological decline, increased resource
scarcity, overburdened infrastructure, fiscal inequities, and the disruptions of climate change. This shift
necessitates radically new responses from the field of city and regional planning. Researchers, corporate
advocates, and policy makers have proposed Smart city as a response to these challenges. They describe Smart
Cities as an evolutionary shift in urban infrastructure and management system combining proliferating IT
systems with the capture and analysis of the real time data they generate to inform and optimize metropolitan
planning and management decision-making (Cisco system 2015; Hodgkinson 2011; Hitachi, 2015). The Smart
Cities approach is generating significant policy and investment support and is projected to represent an
infrastructure investment market exceeding $42.72 trillion by 2030 with a compound annual growth rate of 16.6
percent between 2015-2019 (Digital Journal 2015; Smart City Project 2015).
In this paper I explore Ecological Wisdom as an alternative path for sustainable urban development. Researchers
describe Ecological Wisdom as a revealed property of good design requiring minimal intervention, input, and
maintenance from ecological and social system (Xiang, 2014). While Smart city emphasize the centrality of
new, digital technology networks, Ecological Wisdom draws upon historical precedents emphasizing place-based,
life-centered system. I this article I critically contrast these two competing visions for the future of city planning.
To accomplish this I use Sir Patrick Geddes’s combined theory of civics and technics as a framework to analyze
discourses associated with these divergent planning approaches (Geddes 1912; 1917). I investigate the ability of
these discursive assumptions to provide sustainable solutions in the context of Riddel and Webber’s concept of
wicked problems (Riddel and Webber 1973). I then explore principal case studies associated with each strategy to
reflect on the type of urbanism and its consequent social and ecological relations, each path is generating.
Cisco system 2015. Smart and connected comminuty. Retrieved March 4th, 2015 from
http://www.cisco.com/web/strategy/smart_connected_communities.html
Digital Journal, 2015. Retrieved March 4th, 2015 from http://www.digitaljournal.com/pr/2481679
Geddes, P., 1912. The twofold aspect of the industrial age: Paleotechnic and neotechnic. The Town Planning
Review, 3, (3), 176-187.
Geddes, P. & Slater G., 1917. The making of the future: Ideas at war. London: Williams and Norgate.
Hitachi Corporation 2015. Smart city case studies. Retrieved March 4th, 2015 from
(http://www.hitachi.com/products/smartcity/)

Hodgkinson, S. 2011. Is your city smart enough? Digitally enabled city and societies will enhance economic,
social and environment sustainability in the urban century. Retrieved March 4, 2015 from
http://www.cisco.com/web/strategy/docs/Is_your_city_smart_enough-Ovum_Analyst_Insights.pdf
Riddel, H. and Melvin Webber, 1973. Dilemmas in a general theory of planning. Policy Science 4: 155-169.
Smart City Project, 2015. Retrieved March 4th, 2015 from http://www.smartcity-planning.co.jp/en/index.html
Xaing, W., 2014. Doing real and permanent good in landscape and urban_planning: Ecological wisdom for urban
sustainability. Landscape and urban_planning, 121: 65-69.
References
 Cisco system 2015. Smart and connected comminuty. Retrieved March 4th, 2015 from
http://www.cisco.com/web/strategy/smart_connected_communities.html
 Digital Journal, 2015. Retrieved March 4th, 2015 from http://www.digitaljournal.com/pr/2481679
 Geddes, P., 1912. The twofold aspect of the industrial age: Paleotechnic and neotechnic. The Town
Planning Review, 3, (3), 176-187.
 Geddes, P. & Slater G., 1917. The making of the future: Ideas at war. London: Williams and Norgate.
 Hitachi Corporation 2015. Smart city case studies. Retrieved March 4th, 2015 from
(http://www.hitachi.com/products/smartcity/)

Abstract Index #: 638
OCCUPY MOVEMENT AND THE ENLIGHTENMENT OF URBAN POLITICAL AWARENESS: THE CASE OF TAIWAN’S
SUNFLOWER MOVEMENT, MARCH 2014
Abstract System ID#: 1226
Individual Paper
TUNG, Chienhung [National Chung-Hsing University] ct176@columbia.edu
With the expansion of contemporary capitalism and the advance of informational technology, the power of
global capitalism has strongly challenged the ability of nation-state to re-distribute and re-allocate social and
economic resources within its border. The Polarization of capital accumulation has made the wealth concentrate
on the top 1% global elite and the rest become the victims of globalization.
Hence, since 2011, a wave of “occupy movement,” starting from Occupy Wall Street, has become a symbol and
real action against global capitalism. Throughout these occupy movements, the Youth generation who has
suffered from the misery of polarization of global capitalism gains a channel to voice out their angers and ideas.
The mode of occupy movement takes over and even further occupies a real physical space to protest against the
system itself, as dissimilar as previous social movement which often marched on the street to protest against
policies or some political and/or social leaders; and connect with each other via virtual reality space, such as
twitter, facebook etc.. It quickly attracts the new generation who consider themselves as the detached and
apolitical generation to stand out and up to combat this uneven economic and social development. Therefore,
such a new mode of social movement and its spatial strategy seems to enlighten the political awareness of a new
generation.
Employing Taiwan sunflower movement as the case, the authors argue that occupation of a symbolic place and
places where once were viewed as the symbol of social-political and/or economic power in the urban society
would enlighten the political awareness of the participants and therefore further change the urban politics.

Abstract Index #: 639
PLANNING, DEVELOPMENT, AND MEDIATIZATION: A CASE STUDY OF MEGAPROJECT MANAGEMENT
Abstract System ID#: 1227
Individual Paper
SCHWEITZER, Lisa [University of Southern California] lschweit@usc.edu, presenting author, primary author

STEPHENSON, Max [Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State University] mstephen@vt.edu
What messages should planners craft for the media, and for whose ends? These questions are important
because media select, advance and privilege particular stories that can influence the way people think about
cities and planning (Flybvjerg 2012). Nonetheless, media are market-oriented purveyors of information, and
what sells to consumers may not be the most useful information to stimulate and inform democratic discussions
about city and planning. Theorists of democratic deliberation disagree about the role that the media play and
the role that the media should undertake, in social learning and ensuring informed public political judgment,
largely because media content tends towards the simplistic and spectacular rather than the complex and
reasoned (Meyer 2002; Allern & Blach-Østen 2014).
This article examines the tensions planners encounter when interacting with media, particularly during agonistic
conflicts over development. We argue that planning occurs within the context of what political theorists refer to
as a ‘mediatized politics’ in which participants perform for and message to mass audiences for both long-term,
reputational ends as well as to address the demands of an immediate issue or conflict. Like many other
possibilities for influence, access to media, particularly premier media outlets that command large audiences, is
unequal among participants in local planning conflicts, as is the expertise necessary to frame ideas to appeal to
journalists who write or broadcast for mass audiences. The question becomes how local planners enmeshed in
political conflicts should proceed in democratic contexts saturated by media engagement and coverage. In the
social construction of what is real and important in city and planning, the media’s emphasis on what is
entertaining, spectacular, or readily comprehended presents public deliberative decision-making, and planners
who would seek to catalyze it, with both opportunities and pitfalls. Opportunities exist for professional selfpromotion and marketing, while the potential pitfalls concern democratic and civic engagement.
We illustrate our broader arguments using an exemplary case in Washington, D.C. involving the Woodrow Wilson
Bridge replacement. We conducted expert interviews with media professionals employed as producers,
reporters, public relations specialists, editors, or journalists. We employed the casuistical methodology
advocated by Thacher (2004) in this journal, which allowed us to ground the normative tensions of strong media
engagement for planning within the context of a high-profile case.
References
 Flyvbjerg, B. (2012). Why mass media matter to planning research: The case of megaprojects. Journal of
Planning Education and Research, 32(2), 169-181
 Johnson, B. J., & Graves, M. (2011). Keeping it real. Journal of the American Planning Association, 77(3),
214-231
 Meyer, T. (2002). Media democracy: How the media colonize politics. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press ;
Malden, MA : Blackwell
 Allern, S., & Blach-Ørsten, M. (2011). The news media as a political institution. Journalism Studies, 12(1),
92-105.
 Thacher, D. (2004). The casuistical turn in planning ethics: Lessons from law and medicine. Journal of
Planning Education and Research, 23(3), 269-285. doi:10.1177/0739456X0326128

Abstract Index #: 640
BETWEEN AUTONOMY AND CONTROL: GOVERNMENTALIZED PRACTICES OF PLANNING IN SAO PAULO
Abstract System ID#: 1247
Individual Paper
TORRES, Nilton Ricoy [University of Sao Paulo] nrtorres@usp.br
The paper argues that planning is a technology of power aimed at 'governing' urban populations. By taking
planning as a practice of government the text evaluates the Sao Paulo experience with public participation and
shows how participatory planning became a legitimation strategy of government.

Power is understood as a web of relationships that acts to regulate the conduct of the individuals. In this view,
power does not mean constraining the individuals’ freedom, but rather, freedom is deemed as a necessary
condition for exercising power.
The paper explores the concept of power by focusing on the micro relations of power in society and seeks to
explain how they become condensed on the State in the form of government. The discussion on the forms of
power attached to government is developed through the concept of governmentality. As advanced by Foucault
governmentality expresses the government ways of thinking and acting as an attempt to know and control
individuals everyday life. As a form of power, governmentality is understood as (1) the consolidation and
proliferation of the State governance devices and (2) the development of a complex set of skills and knowledge
on how to govern and exert control.
The study evaluates to what extent the participatory planning experiment in Sao Paulo was an effective
mechanism for social inclusion or, if it was only a governmentalized relation directed to manipulate and control
citizens. The paper is divided into two parts. The first discusses the theoretical foundations and the second
evaluates Sao Paulo Planning experience.
References
 Appadurai, A. 2002. Deep democracy: Urban governmentality and the horizon of politics Public Culture,
14(1), pp. 21–47.
 Dean, M. 1999. Governmentality: Power and rule in modern society, London, Thousand Oaks, New Delhi:
Sage.
 Flyvbjerg, B. 2003. Rationality and power. In Scott Campbell and Susan S. Fainstein, eds., Readings in
planning theory, 2ª ed. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 318-329.
 Foucault, M. 1995. O sujeito e o poder. In.: DREYFUS, Hubert; RABINOW, Paul Michel Foucault. Uma
trajetória filosófica: para além do estruturalismo e da hermenêutica. Rio de Janeiro: Forense
Universitária.
 Roy, A. 2009. Civic governmentality: The politics of inclusion in Beirut and Mumbai. Antipode, 41 (1),
pp.159-179.

Abstract Index #: 641
A PRAGMATIST MODEL OF TRANSFORMING URBAN INEQUALITIES: CREATING LIVABLE city IN A TIME OF
CRISIS
Abstract System ID#: 1276
Individual Paper
WOODS, David [New York University] Dwoods@stamfordct.gov
Since the September 15, 2008 economic crash, the world has seen times of human suffering and uncertainty on
multiple levels capital – economic, social, ecological and existential – that has led to a crisis in city worldwide.
This crisis focusing on city has further exasperated the already widening inequalities among income groups –
wealthy vs. low-income with middle class being squeezed out of the worlds’ largest city, social capital, which
enables individuals and groups to expand their horizons, ecological capital – potable water for all citizens, not just
those who can purchase it, as well as clean air, accessible parks and open spaces, and existential capital, which
allows for the belief in oneself. In this paper, I argue that planning scholars need to take a more nuanced analysis
of inequalities in city; present a pragmatist model of transformation that draws from Dewey, Mead, Habermas,
Green, and Fung, and apply this model to these three architectures of social, built and ecological.
George Herbert Mead’s context-specific, radical transformation-focused insights about how to achieve a deeper,
social democracy date from the years before the beginning of his close partnership with John Dewey. These
insights include the idea that local urban activism is the most effective way to foster change. Since the early
1960s, leading urban planners, philosophers, sociologists and other political theorists have produced a
considerable body of scholarship on the effectiveness of participatory and deliberative democracy as a tool for

transforming comminuty through empowering local civic leaders and other citizens to influence public
decisions, both in the United States and in other nations. Dewey would point out that achieving this goal requires
individual and civic investment in a long-term process of educating citizens in more deeply democratic habits of
community living. Mead would add that it also requires adapting our existing institutions to respond to the inputs
of more deeply democratic individuals and comminuty. This will not be easy, because empowerment changes
power relations.
Important recent works in transformative social theory that combine ideas and methods from Jürgen Habermas
on deliberative democracy and from John Dewey on democratic citizen participation have become effective and
influential guides for scholars and activitist. Over the last twenty years, considerable scholarship has focused on
participatory democracy and deliberative democracy, at times using the terms interchangeably. This is not a
distinction of theory versus practice.
Citizen participation beyond the franchise is not necessary for ordinary bureaucratic decision-making on matters
like whether an applicant for a  land_use permit has submitted all necessary documents, or for ordinary
representative decision-making on issues like whether to grant a variance to allow a new restaurant to use a
portion of a public sidewalk for outdoor seating in a business zone in which this is already common practice.
However, post-disaster contexts of deciding whether to rebuild a city neighborhood or a village park, citizen
participation can contribute to social healing. In making long-range plans, including budget planning dispersed
and diverse citizen embedded knowledge and values can make plans more effective as well as more achievable.
In these and more ordinary kinds of planning for significant change, citizens can contribute epistemically.
Moreover, their participation contributes to their education and to the emergence of new social habits in the
culture, as Mead and Dewey argued. This is how real, twenty-first century people move from abstract citizenship
that may mean little to them to substantial citizenship in which neighbors become real players in shaping their
civic future. Democracy becomes grounded in real ways of living that shape city in more sustainable ways
through collaborative planning, and shared citizen commitment to creating livable city through the interlinking
of the social/political, built and environment architectures.
References
 Healey, Patsy. 2008. “The Pragmatic Tradition in Planning Thought,” in Journal of Planning Education
and Research, December 2008, Volume 27, No. 2
 Fung, Archon. 2004. "Empowered Participation: Reinventing Urban Democracy." Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
 Forester, John. 1999. "The Deliberative Practitioner: Encouraging Participatory Planning Processes."
Cambridge: MIT Press.
 David W. Woods. 2014. “George Herbert Mead on the Social Bases of Democracy,” George Herbert
Mead in the 21st Century, ed. Tom Burke and Krzysztof Skowronski, Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
 David W. Woods, "Democracy Deferred: Civic Leadership after 9/11," Palgrave Macmillan (2012)

Abstract Index #: 642
PLACE-MAKING WITHOUT PLAN-MAKING: INTERVIEWS IN ITALY
Abstract System ID#: 1295
Individual Paper
FORESTER, John [Cornell University] jff1@cornell.edu
I propose to report on work in progress during my sabbatic leave in Rome, Italy. Collaborating with Daniela De
Leo, La Sapienza, and Laura Saija, U. of Catania, I will be interviewing Italian practitioners and collecting practicefocused oral historical material about place-making not strictly prescribed by plan-making. Drawing upon work of
David Laws and myself published in Spring of 2015, Conflict, Improvisation, Governance (Routledge, RTPI, 2015), I
will assess how Italian place-making practitioners integrate expertise, diagnosis, and decision-making to shape
places when prescriptive rules administratively, politically, and aesthetically are all fluid, ambiguous, contested,
and indeterminate in complex local contexts. I will be working on a book project tentatively titled Place-making

Without Plan-making, and the analytic questions animating that project with be those exploring the creative and
practical improvisation required of place-makers seeking to be attentive to high quality (beautiful, just, interest
serving) practical (implementable, realizable) results drawing upon the best available expertise.
References
 Laws, David and J. Forester. 2015. Conflict, Improvisation, Governance. Routledge 2015.
 Innes, Judith and David Booher. 2010. Planning With Complexity: An Introduction to Collaborative
Rationality for Public Policy. London: Routledge.
 Healey, Patsy. 2009. “The Pragmatic Tradition in Planning Thought.” Journal of Planning Education and
Research. Vol. 28, 3: pp. 277-292.
 Gualini, Enrico. 2015. Planning and Conflict.
 Barrett, Frank. 2012. Yes to the Mess: Surprising Leadership Lessons from Jazz. Harvard.

Abstract Index #: 643
GLOBALIZATION AND THE CHANGING URBANISM OF WORLD city: IMPLICATIONS FOR PLANNING THEORY
AND PRACTICE
Abstract System ID#: 1322
Individual Paper
BANERJEE, Tridib [University of Southern California] tbanerje@usc.edu, presenting author, primary author
CHAKRAVARTY, Surajit [ALHOSN University] surajitc@usc.edu
CHAN, Felicity Hwee-Hwa [University of Southern California] hweehwac@usc.edu
Urbanism has become a fashionable term these days. In the Anglophone world the concept of urbanism that
Wirth associated with population size, density, and heterogeneity in the 1930s still remains a bit of an enigma,
even though the professional discourse in urban_planning and design is now teeming with the term “urbanism,”
shaped by various qualifiers, thus: “new urbanism,” “landscape urbanism,” “Latino urbanism,” “ecological
urbanism,” “everyday urbanism,” “ethnic urbanism,” “informal urbanism,” “situational urbanism,” and even
“agricultural urbanism,” oxymoronic as it may sound. But veryafew of them address how globalization is
transforming the “urbanism” of the American city, however it might be defined.
Most significant transformative effects of globalization, according to political theorists Savitch and Kantor (2002),
can be seen in the city that are competing in the international marketplace for global capital and investment.
Shaped by global capital, deindustrialization of urban economies, de-concentration of older city, and
replacement of public realm by corporate urban development are being unleashed across city. However,
according to Pizzaro, Wei and Banerjee (2003), “agency” of capital, people, culture and information technology
rather than “flows” per se refocuses the controversial effects of globalization on urbanism such as the conflicts of
multiculturalism and threat of metropolitan fragmentation.
Despite Fainstein’s (2010) argument that diversity must be considered an essential construct in planning for a
“just city” and the earlier works of Sandercock (1998), Qadeer, and others on planning for multicultural city,
there has been limited planning theoretic discourse. With an aim to expand this discourse, the paper will discuss
four major tensions in contemporary American urbanism resulting from the agencies of globalization -- spaces of
flow versus space of places (Castells 1996) ; spaces of hope versus spaces of despair (Harvey, ); spaces of diaspora
and ethnoscapes (Appadurai, ) in a multicultural urban space (Sandercock 1998, Qadeer ); splintering urbanism
(Graham and Marvin, 2001) and the resulting spaces of informality, hybridity, exclusion, and occupation (Roy
2007). These tensions correspondingly raise further questions about the scope and role of planning in the
formation of a just city (Fainstein, 2000, Lefebvre, 1968) and the possibility for a cosmopolis. The paper will
conclude by addressing these issues in planning practice in the context of the emergent urbanism of
globalization.
References
 Fainstein, Susan 2010 The Just City. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press






Sandercock, Leonie (1997) Towards Cosmopolis: Planning for Multicultural city. New York: John Wiley
& Sons.
Castells, Manuel 1996 The Rise of the Network Society. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Harvey, David (2000) Spaces of Hope. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Roy, Ananya 2007 “Urban Informality: Toward an Epistemology of Planning” Journal of American
Planning Association, 781(2): 147-158.

Abstract Index #: 644
STRATEGIES AS SOCIAL AND DISCURSIVE PRACTICES IN A BRAZILIAN PUBLIC UNIVERSITY: A CRITICAL
APPROACH
Abstract System ID#: 1349
Individual Paper
BRITO, Mozar [Federal University of Lavras] odemirbaeta@posgrad.ufla.br
This empirical research analyzes the process of formation of strategies such as social and discursive practices of
the Federal University of Viçosa throughout its existence. We take as the main empirical investigative reality the
process of formation of strategies practiced by its main social subjects based on the approach of the Strategy as
Practice and so understand how the action and structures were articulated in the strategy formation process,
showing where and how the activities to make strategy happen, those who performed, what skills necessary to
exercise them and how they were acquired. It was possible to understand the small sets of activities performed
by social subjects that somehow were responsible for the formation of organizational strategies over time.
Understanding the organizational phenomena requires practices that lead to the formation of an inter-subjective
understanding and knowledge, which does not mean second, Godoi et al. (2012), the possibility to realize in our
assumptions for the study execution of previous certainties questions, producing new designs. Not prescribe this
work, but we share the lived experience in a systematic way, with the possibility of methodological triangulation
and fostering epistemological discussion. The methodological design through documentary research, interviews
in depth unstructured and focus groups combined with photo-elicitation and the non-participant observation
were conducted and achieved the answers to research questions in an effort to understand the strategies and
practices sóciodiscursivas formed by social subjects University under a critical approach, unveiling what is implied
by the seizure of discursive practices and their meanings for teachers servers and administrative staff of the
university, and thus seizing the formation of the said federal institution of higher education strategy.
References
 JARZABKOWSKI, P. (2008) Shaping strategy as a structuration process. Academy of Management Journal,
vol.51, ed.4, pp. 621-650.
 ROULEAU, L.; BALOGUN, J. (2011) Middle Managers, Strategic Sensemaking, and Discursive Competence.
Journal of Management Studies, vol.48, ed.5, especial: SI, pp. 953-983.
 VAARA, E. (2010) Taking the Linguistic Turn Seriously: Strategy as a multifaceted and interdiscursive
Phenomenon. Orgs. Baum, JAC; Lampel, J. Globalization of Strategy Research, Série de livros: Advances
in Strategic Management-A Research Annual, v. 27, pp.29-50.
 SPEE, A. P.; JARZABKOWSKI, P. (2011) Strategic planning as communicative process. Organizations
Studies, v. 32, n. 9, ed. esp.SI, p. 1217-1245.
 FAIRCLOUGH, N. (2003) Analysing discourse: textual analysis for social research. London; New York:
Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 645
INFORMALITY AS DE FACTO RIGHT TO THE CITY: PLANNING AND NEW-OLD FORMS OF URBAN SOCIAL
MOVEMENT
Abstract System ID#: 1352
Individual Paper

KAMEL, Nabil [Western Washington University] Nabil.Kamel@wwu.edu
This paper argues that “informal” practices in marginalized comminuty represent a “de facto” right to the city
and constitute a contemporary form of social movement. The paper suggests that these practices offer an
opportunity for planning to re-orient the ways by which it deals with notions of resource allocation, private and
public property, and community decision-making through the lens of mutual aid, communal property, and
membership networks. The paper examines practices of urban resistance embedded in the everyday life of
marginalized social groups in the metropolitan area of Phoenix, Arizona. In large metropoles of the U.S. Sunbelt,
such as Phoenix, the dominant urban form is inherited from the postwar period and continues to be reproduced
according to the Fordist logic of standardized mass-production development. This pattern of development not
only outlived the society for which it was produced, but also undermined the livability of older neighborhood,
especially in inner-ring suburbs that provide the few affordable housing options available to low-income
immigrant families. The enforcement of outdated and obsolete controls over the use of space creates a climate
of physical and mental incarceration in these neighborhood. The paper focuses on resistance practices
embedded in everyday life and that counter oppressive patterns of urbanization. We adapt the framework
developed by James Scott in his analysis of hidden forms of resistance by peasants in developing countries (Scott
1985; 1990) and operationalize it using De Certeau’s (1984) concepts of “strategies” and “tactics” to connect the
rules of planned urban form (strategies) and local responses to maneuver through them (tactics). This framework
is applied to older inner-ring suburbs of the Phoenix metropolitan area and focuses on tactics that are
unsanctioned and violate existing regulations. The paper synthesizes findings from the observations of over 100
such tactics and is divided into three sections. The first section describes the constraints from within which
resistance emerges. Here the historical evolution of Phoenix’s social and spatial form is analyzed and illustrates a
pattern marked by leapfrogging, outward expansion, relocation of jobs and services, freeway construction, and
the destruction of established neighborhood. The second section provides an ethnographic illustration of how
residents of these neighborhood, through practices embedded in their everyday lives, organically reconstitute
urban spaces despite formal restrictions. These unsanctioned practices cover a wide range – from guerrilla
gardening, to mobile vendors, street markets, yard sales, home businesses, and building additions. The last
section situates the widespread and networked production of these tactics in the context of contemporary forms
of social movements and urban resistance. Insights gained from the analysis of spaces and tactics of resistance
broaden our understanding of political action in city and especially among low-income and immigrant
communities. The paper concludes by challenging mainstream views of the role of urban_planning (and urban
planners) and suggests avenues for progressive social change, supporting community-empowerment, and
fostering endogenous political practices.
References
 Marcuse, Peter. 2009. “From critical urban theory to the right to the city.” City 13(2-3): 185-197.
 Scott, James. 1985. Weapons of the Weak: Everyday Forms of Peasant Resistance. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
 Smith, Neil. 1996. The New Urban Frontier: Gentrification and the Revanchist City. London: Routledge.
 Harvey, David. 2008. “The right to the city.” New Left Review 53(Sep-Oct): 23-40.
 Holston, James. 2009. Insurgent Citizenship in an Era of Global Urban Peripheries. City & Society, Vol.
21, Issue 2, pp. 245-267.

Track 13: Regional Planning
Abstract Index #: 646
REGIONAL GOVERNANCE:  impact OF A STATE MANDATE FOR REGIONAL SUSTAINABILITY PLANNING ON
LOCAL-REGIONAL COOPERATION AND IMPLEMENTATION ACTIVITIES
Abstract System ID#: 894
Individual Paper

MATTIUZZI, Elizabeth [University of California, Berkeley] emattiuzzi@gmail.com
Metropolitan Planning Organizations (MPOs) in California prepared sustainable comminuty strategies (SCSs) in
response to the state’s  land_use and climate planning law, SB 375. For the first time, the SCSs tie state housing
goals to regional transportation spending. Multiple actors within regions are responsible for implementing the
first round SCSs. SB 375 relies on MPOs to support local changes in  land_use to reduce greenhouse GHG
emissions. Yet in practice, congestion management agencies (CMAs) are also playing a significant part in
encouraging compact  land_uses and housing production. For example, CMAs in the Bay Area oversee funds
distributed by the region to support SCS implementation. In the Los Angeles region, CMAs are also councils of
government (COGs) and have taken an active role in coordinating and supporting local climate planning efforts
based on local desire to attract development activity and state planning grants. What is the gap between SCS
intentions and local implementation outcomes, and what role have CMAs played in facilitating or hindering
regional sustainability governance? This paper presents the results of interviews in the Bay Area and Los Angeles
with local and regional actors on SCS implementation activities and the role of CMAs as an intermediary between
MPO goals and the realities faced by city. While most CMAs are supportive of regional GHG reduction goals,
they also have a distinct outlook on what solutions will be effective in a local context. This paper builds on the
literatures in multiscalar governance and state mandated planning (Christensen 1999; Dalton and Burby 1994) as
well as past research on regional governance (Innes and Rongerude 2013; Weir, Rongerude, and Ansell 2009). It
places these literatures in conversation with scholarship on sustainability planning in regions (Barbour and Deakin
2012) and at the local level (Millard-Ball 2013; Talen 2011; Wheeler 2008). city and CMAs are where the rubber
meets the road on SCS implementation, and the results of this paper will be of interest to policymakers and
regional actors trying to improve on the SCSs as they enter their second cycle, as well as to scholars who wish to
understand how sustainability planning is changing regional governance.
References
 Dalton, Linda C., and Raymond J. Burby. 1994. “Mandates, Plans, and Planners: Building Local
Commitment to Development Management.” Journal of the American Planning Association 60 (4): 444–
61. doi:10.1080/01944369408975604.
 Christensen, Karen S. 1999. city and Complexity: Making Intergovernmental Decisions. Sage.
 Innes, Judith E., and Jane Rongerude. 2013. “Civic Networks for Sustainable Regions – Innovative
Practices and Emergent Theory.” Planning Theory & Practice 14 (1): 75–100.
doi:10.1080/14649357.2012.754487.
 Weir, Margaret, Jane Rongerude, and Christopher K. Ansell. 2009. “Collaboration Is Not Enough Virtuous
Cycles of Reform in Transportation Policy.” Urban Affairs Review 44 (4): 455–89.
doi:10.1177/1078087408322590.
 Millard-Ball, Adam. 2013. “The Limits to Planning Causal  impact of City Climate Action Plans.” Journal of
Planning Education and Research 33 (1): 5–19.

Abstract Index #: 647
REINTERPRETING THE FUTURE: AN INNER-CITY EXPERIMENT WITH YOUTH JOB CREATION IN URBAN
MANUFACTURING
Abstract System ID#: 169
Pre-organized Session: Inclusive Innovation
LOWE, Nichola [University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill] nlowe@unc.edu
Cities and regions are struggling for solutions to youth unemployment. Increasingly, we find examples of
experimentation to support alternative pathways into work—pathways that are less dependent on initial
completion of a four-year college degree. Rising student debt, in combination with persistent and high
joblessness among recent college graduates, often justifies expedited approaches to labor market transition.
While formal education can certainly play a role in these alternative models, it is often embedded within the
work experience itself, through structured apprenticeships, on-the-job learning, technically-oriented diplomas or

company-sponsored scholarships. Still, while the promotion of alternative qualifications and pathways are
designed to quicken the pace of youth entry into regional labor markets, it is wrong to presume this is an easier,
less risky and more enduring solution to career development, compared to pushing greater college attainment. In
many respects, bypassing (or significantly delaying) college means a more condensed transition to work and thus
increases pressure on both students and employers to demonstrate value and commitment to one another.
While some skeptics might dismiss a 4-year college degree as simply a signifier of potential skill and trainability, a
closer look suggests the college experience actually helps institutionalize a pathway into work by bridging current
and future expectations of students and employers. Through coursework, internship program and alumni
networks, many colleges help students anticipate the work experience, at the same time that they prepare
employers for engaging and incorporating a more youthful workforce.
In promoting alternatives to college, how do workforce practitioners institutionalize the transition to work for
younger job seekers? What strategies do they use to more closely align the needs of prospective employers and
younger labor market entrants? And what actions and supports are taken to transform an expedited pathway to
work into an opportunity for future career success and mobility? This paper addresses these questions through
an illustrative case study of the Austin Polytechnical Academy (APA). APA is a public high school based in a lowincome, predominately African American neighborhood on the West side of Chicago. Launched in 2005, APA’s
Manufacturing Connect program helps students and graduates prepare for and secure quality jobs in urban
manufacturing firms. A central aim is both to educate high school students (and also their parents) about
rewarding careers in manufacturing and provide them with the foundational skills and tools to embark on
manufacturing careers post-graduation. But APA’s Manufacturing Connect program is not simply preparing
Chicago’s next generation manufacturing workforce. Intentionally modeled as a workforce intermediary and
therefore ‘dual-customer’ in approach, Manufacturing Connect is also designed to engage local employers in
ways that shift perceptions of inner-city youth and their potential contribution to industry innovation and
survival. Additionally, they work closely with employers to identify and resolve gaps in human resource strategies
that can undermine the ability of firms to recruit and retain APA graduates.
After a brief review of existing writings on workforce intermediation and strategies of skill reinterpretation to
promote youth employment, we turn to the specifics of the Manufacturing Connect program, including its
institutional link to earlier program in support of Chicago’s manufacturing renaissance. We conclude by arguing
that Manufacturing Connect is not simply an innovative model for mediating the relationship between worker
and employer, but also the relationship in time. In essence, Manufacturing Connect helps both employers and
young workers make the conceptual leap between current and future needs and expectations. That is to say, they
are helping both groups reinterpret actions today as investments for the future.
References
 Fitzgerald, J. (2004). Moving the workforce intermediary agenda forward. Economic Development
Quarterly, 18 (1).
 Giloth, R. P. (1998). “Introduction: A case for workforce intermediaries.” In Jobs and economic
development. R. Giloth (ed.). Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.
 Lester, R. and M. Piore. (2004). Innovation: The Missing Dimension. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
 Hoffman, N. (2011). Schooling in the Workplace: How Six of the World's Best Vocational Education
Systems Prepare Young People for Jobs and Life. Cambridge: Harvard Education Press.
 Lowe, N. (2015). From skill mismatch to reinterpretation: Challenges and solutions for manufacturing
worker retention and recruitment. In J. Bryson, J. Clark, and V. Vanchan (eds). Handbook of
Manufacturing Industries in the World Economy. Edward Elgar.

Abstract Index #: 648
MAPPING WORKING REGIONS: ASSESSING REGIONAL PATTERNS OF INNOVATION CAPACITY AND
MANUFACTURING EMPLOYMENT OUTCOMES
Abstract System ID#: 185
Pre-organized Session: Inclusive Innovation

SCHROCK, Greg [Portland State University] gschrock@pdx.edu, presenting author, primary author
DOUSSARD, Marc [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] mjd620@gmail.com
LESTER, Thomas William [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] twlester@unc.edu
In recent years, scholars and policy advocates have sought to move the discourse about the revitalization of U.S.
manufacturing away from a narrow focus on innovation and output growth and toward a more inclusive
framework that emphasizes employment, and production-related jobs in particular, as key outcomes. Yet
empirical research on what Jennifer Clark (2013) calls “working regions” – where innovation and advanced
manufacturing production co-exist in mutually supportive ways – has been mostly limited to case-oriented
analyses that have often suffered from the tendency to “look under the lamp light” for successful cases. While
useful for highlighting causal mechanisms at work, these intensive modes of analysis are inherently limited in
their ability to track broader patterns of correlative relationships, and importantly, to highlight cases that are
potentially revelatory but might otherwise go undetected and unstudied (Benner and Pastor 2012).
In this paper we address this gap by assessing variation in U.S. regional innovation capacity and its relationship to
regional manufacturing and development outcomes across two recent periods: the early-mid 2000s (2000-07)
and the post-Great Recession period (2008-12). Building on the approach taken by Doussard and Schrock (2015),
we develop and test multivariate statistical models relating measures of regional innovation activity and
outcomes – such as STEM-related occupational employment, patent activity, federally-funded research – against
an array of regional development outcomes, including overall employment growth and manufacturing growth.
Our data for this analysis draws primarily from the Census Bureau’s American Community Survey Public Use
Microdata Series (PUMS), which allow us to capture regional industrial and occupational employment
specializations; we augment this with innovation metrics drawn from a variety of federal data sources.
Our analysis yields several important insights, both for deciphering the changing landscape of U.S. regional
innovation and manufacturing economies as well as for further scholarship. We show that the relationship
between innovation and production has grown stronger overall in recent years, but that this relationship varies
to some extent across technology sectors (e.g., computers versus biopharma). While our models are statistically
significant overall, we find that they alternately over- and under-predict employment outcomes for many regions.
Rather than treating this as a shortcoming of the modeling approach, we use this as the basis for subsequent
analysis, by clustering regions based on three categories: “thin innovation” regions with high innovation but low
employment growth (i.e., overpredicted by the model); “production platform” regions with low innovation but
high production employment growth (i.e., underpredicted); and finally, “working regions” with strong growth in
both design and production activities. Our model results will inform subsequent case-based and extensive
research focused on the role of regional institutional intermediaries – for innovation, supply chain, and workforce
development – in shaping the relationship between regional innovation and manufacturing growth outcomes
(Clark 2014).
References
 Benner, Chris, and Manuel Pastor. 2012. Just Growth: Inclusion and Prosperity in America’s Metropolitan
Regions. New York: Routledge.
 Clark, Jennifer. 2013. Working Regions: Reconnecting Innovation and Production in the Knowledge
Economy. New York: Routledge.
 Clark, Jennifer. 2014. “Manufacturing by Design: The Rise of Regional Intermediaries and the ReEmergence of Collective Action.” Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society 7 (3): 433–48.
 Doussard, Marc, and Greg Schrock. 2015. “Are ‘Working Regions’ More Stable? Testing the Stability of
Regions That Integrate Manufacturing Design with Production.” Unpublished Working Paper.
Champaign, IL: University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

Abstract Index #: 649
AN IMPACT ANALYSIS OF A RAIL FREIGHT RATE INCREASE ON REGIONAL ECONOMY AND environment
QUALITY: THE CASE OF MULTI-REGIONS IN KOREA

Abstract System ID#: 235
Individual Paper
KIM, Hong Bae [Hanyang University] hokim@hanyang.ac.kr, presenting author, primary author
LEE, HYUN KYUNG [Hanyang University] lhk29@nate.com
It is generally believed that there exists a trade-off between environment quality and economic efficiency. That
is to say, a policy that attempts to enhance environment quality tends to result in economic inefficiency.
However, this perception may not apply to government-owned enterprises in Korea, specifically Korail which is a
national railroad corporation. Korail is a typical government-owned enterprise and its inherent role is to provide
the public with fast and environmently sustainable rail transportation services at a low cost.
Recently, Korail announced a policy that raises rail freight rates by 10-15% in order to overcome its financial
deficit operation. When this policy goes into effect, experts anticipate the prices of commodities will rise due to
the increase in transportation costs. Consequently, it is expected that the demand for rail transportation will
decrease. Furthermore, environment quality is expected to be negatively impacted since more pollutants are
generated. This is particularly case with air pollution resulting from the shift in demand from rail to other
transportation modes including road and marine transportation. Needless to say, the Korail's new policy is
considered inappropriate both economically and environmently.
This paper attempts to analyze the  impact of the aforementioned policy on Korea's multi-regional economies
and on environment quality. The policy is analyzed in terms of three  impact: ⅰ) on regional economies, ⅱ) on
modal split, and ⅲ) on CO2 emission. A multi-region prices input-output model is employed for the analysis. The
paper specifically analyses the  impact of the policy on the economy and on the environment quality.
Moreover, the paper reveals that there is no trade-off between environment quality and economic efficiency in
case of the Korail. In other words, the policy will amount to a lose-lose situation as opposed to win-win. Finally,
the paper suggests a policy direction for the government-owned enterprise (Korail), based on the results
obtained.

Abstract Index #: 650
GROWTH AND EQUITY BENEFITS OF INCLUSIVE INNOVATION: COMPARING BIOPHARMACEUTICALS IN NORTH
CAROLINA AND PENNSYLVANIA 2000-2010
Abstract System ID#: 251
Pre-organized Session: Inclusive Innovation
WOLFPOWERS, Laura [University of Pennsylvania] lwpowers@gc.cuny.edu, presenting author, primary author
LOWE, Nichola [University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill] nlowe@unc.edu
Although biopharmaceuticals is one of the most heavily-studied industries in the regional policy field, few
scholars have examined manufacturing policy for the sector. In many ways, an emphasis on the laboratory over
the shop floor is understandable; biopharmaceuticals is fundamentally science-driven, and the translation of
knowledge from basic research through the development and commercialization of drugs and therapeutics is of
great interest to those who study the innovation process. Cultivating and securing bio-manufacturing jobs in
addition to bio-research jobs, however, holds out the possibility that bioscience-specialized regions can pursue
equity goals through diverse employment opportunities as they remain on the cutting edge of innovation.
Combined with investments in vocational training institutions, including community colleges, the project of
recruiting pharmaceutical manufacturers and encouraging them to tightly couple research and production
activities (as well as giving research-focused operations incentives to undertake manufacturing) can result in the
growth of high-paying employment for moderately educated workers.
This paper demonstrates the potential for regional institutional action to encourage research and productionrelated employment growth in tandem by comparing policy and trends in North Carolina -- which experienced a
23.5% growth rate in bioscience employment between 2001 and 2010 -- with Pennsylvania, a traditional bio-

pharma stronghold that experienced a 4.9% decline during the same period. We show that the North Carolina
Biotechnology Center (Biotech Center), a quasi-public, state-funded organization, convinced pharmaceutical
companies to build both production and research capacity in the state, while helping homegrown bioresearch
establishments to move into production and to better connect production and R&D capabilities. This has yielded
high paying jobs for recent university graduates; equally important, it has helped pull down the bioscience career
ladder so that it now includes “rungs” for those with modest technical training beyond secondary education
(Lowe 2007, 2014). By contrast, while Pennsylvania possesses path-dependent advantages as a biopharmaceutical hub, it has neither a sector-focused entity with the capacity of the North Carolina Biotechnology
Center nor a commitment to the complementarity of research and production in biopharmaceuticals.
Policymakers in Pennsylvania are heavily focused on nurturing research and commercialization partnerships,
attracting and providing venture funding to start-ups at critical junctures, and training high-level scientists and
laboratory technicians. They do not think of the state’s traditional strengths in manufacturing as an asset to the
retention, growth, or attraction of bioscience enterprises, and their policy practices reflect this discounting of
production’s potential (Wolf-Powers 2012)
Our research suggests that these differences in motivation and institutional capacity help to explain a divergence
in outcomes for the two states over the past decade. This divergence extends beyond employment growth rates:
production- and transportation-related occupations are more prevalent in North Carolina than in other
biopharmaceutical-specialized states, and the occupational breakdown within biosciences is more distributed and
diverse. Further, the workforce in bioscience occupations is significantly more diverse educationally in North
Carolina than in Pennsylvania. Our findings lend support to two hypotheses: that co-locating biopharmaceutical
R&D with manufacturing and encouraging cross-pollination between them can be a viable competitive strategy
(Feldman & Ronzio 2001), and that organizing a deliberate policy strategy around the linkage of research and
production can function as pro-equity policy in addition to spurring regional growth (Clark 2013).
References
 Clark, J. (2013). Working Regions: Reconnecting Innovation and Production in the Knowledge Economy.
New York: Routledge.
 Feldman, M. P. and Ronzio, C. R. (2001). Closing the loop: moving from the laboratory to the shopfloor in
biotechnology manufacturing. Entrepreneurship and Regional Development 13(1), pp. 1–16.
 Lowe, N. J. (2007). Job creation and the knowledge economy: lessons from North Carolina’s life science
manufacturing initiative, Economic Development Quarterly, 21(4), pp. 339–353
 Wolf-Powers, L. (2012). Human Capital-Centered Regionalism in Economic Development: A Case of
Analytics Outpacing Institutions? Urban Studies 49(15): 3427-3446.

Abstract Index #: 651
EFFECTS OF URBAN AND HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS ON VEHICLE MILES TRAVELED: COMPARISON OF 2000
AND 2010
Abstract System ID#: 264
Individual Paper
LEE, Jaechoon [Greater Lansing Housing Coalition] lee.jaechoon@gmail.com, presenting author, primary author
KIM, Suk-Kyung [Michigan State University] kimsk@anr.msu.edu
There have been many studies on the relationship between urban form, household (or travelers) characteristics
and Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT), which could effect on the overall traffic pattern and sustainable development
issues in a region. Such studies show how the urban shape and distribution of urban functions (like population),
relate to VMT. Early studies tried to explain the influence over VMT by fundamental demographic characteristics
such as the area-wide population density, and household characteristics such as household income level and car
ownership (Dunphy & Fisher, 1996; Brownstone, 2008). More recent studies have conducted research on various
aspects of urban characteristics. For instance, they have analyzed the relationship between VMT and distribution
of population and built environment, job-housing proximity, proximity to commercial facilities from housing and
other urban functions (Lee, 2012).

However, most studies have been limited to using specific one-year data during a particular year, although they
used a number of urban area samples. Those studies could easily explain the influence of urban form and
household characteristics on VMT using current conditions of those regions. But those studies have had lower
utility because of the many unknown factors affecting VMT apart from the explanatory variables.
The purposes of this study are to minimize bias generated from one-time regional data with two different time
data, and to maximize the description of the relationship between urban form, household characteristics and
VMT. The fundamental concept of this study is comparing and tracking the demographic and geographic
characteristics at two different time points of the same regions. The differences in characteristics will be
reproduced as a new dataset to explain the relationships.
This study will use and compare demographical and geographical characteristics (which can be called urban form
factors) in 2000 and 2010 as the independent variables for 30 urbanized area. In addition, VMTs in 2000 and
2010 will be used as the dependent variable. The ten-year differences of population density, population
distribution, car ownership, transit usage, centrality, etc. will be analyzed.
It is also known that the size of an urban area affects VMT (Shim, Rhee, Ahn, & Chung, 2006). Thus this study
primarily focuses on the mid-size urban area to control for geographical size. In addition, most previous studies
have used the census tract, TAZ, or zip code as data source. This practice may result in low reliability because
those geographical units are relatively big. The analysis of this study will be performed based on census-block and
census-block-group data in order to increase the reliability of the results.
This empirical study will result in more precise analyses of the effects of urban form and household
characteristics on the VMT in the study area. In addition, the study results will be usable in practical planning
processes concerned with three aspects. First, it will predict overall passenger traffic levels (VMT) needed for
regional development planning. Second, since this method makes it possible to predict changes in VMT, it is
possible to predict the resulting level of greenhouse gases and vehicle exhaust gases. Finally, it will be possible to
predict changes in VMT caused by individual development plans based on variables such as population allocation.
References
 Brownstone, D. (2008). Key relationships between the built environment and VMT. Transportation
Research Board, 7.
 Dunphy, R. T., & Fisher, K. (1996). Transportation, congestion, and density: new insights. Transportation
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 1552(1), 89-96.
 Lee, J. (2012). The Effects of Urban Form on Vehicle Emissions-Focusing On Urban Form Factors and
Three Conventional Air Pollutions and Carbon Dioxide (Doctoral dissertation, The Ohio State University).
 Shim, G. E., Rhee, S. M., Ahn, K. H., & Chung, S. B. (2006). The relationship between the characteristics of
transportation energy consumption and urban form. The Annals of Regional Science, 40(2), 351-367.

Abstract Index #: 652
URBAN INDUSTRIAL LAND RENEWAL POLICY AND IMPLEMENTATION MECHANISM RESEARCH OF THE PEARL
RIVER DELTA REGION – TAKING THE INDUSTRIAL LAND RENEWAL OF GUANGZHOU AND SHENZHEN AS THE
EXAMPLE
Abstract System ID#: 326
Individual Paper
XU, Jing [Tongji University] fanyangsh@126.com, presenting author
YANG, FAN [Tongii University] fanyangsh@tongji.edu.cn, primary author
The Pearl River Delta region is the forefront of reform and opening up in China, where two large city Guangzhou and Shenzhen have been gradually facing the problem of limited  land_use scale for urban
development in the twenty-first century. In order to tap the potential from the existing land, the two local
governments have promulgated policy documents to guide the urban land renewal transformation since the Year

2000, which has a high degree of fit with the current national new urbanization policy. The paper selects the
industrial land renewal projects in Guangzhou and Shenzhen for empirical case research, and evaluates and
compares the space performance before and after the renewal by field investigation, quantitative analysis of
statistic data, spatial analysis and other methods. Meanwhile, it analyzes and compares the key clauses
concerning benefit distribution plan and distribution mechanism of industrial land renewal projects by
reorganizing the policy documents (including ordinances, regulations, measures) related to urban renewal
promulgated after the Year 2000 of the two city and combining with the planning process of specific projects.
Based on the above research, the paper applies the planning research method of combining policy analysis and
spatial analysis for the comparison between renewal policy mechanisms of the two city, and reveals the
mechanism of policy implementation through the evolution of the space layout and structure during the
industrial land renewal. Finally, it points out that there are different urban renewal policy system under the
same background between Guangzhou and Shenzhen, and there are also differences between their
corresponding local space governance mechanism; but from the view of long-term urban development and
spatial justice, the two city are both in an economic interest balancing stage realizing local urban renewal, and
have not yet reached the stage of evaluating specific projects from the overall urban spatial equity.
References
 WANG Aimin, MIAO Bozhong, CHEN Shurong. Spatial Differentiation and Impact Factors of Industrial
Land-use in Guangzhou [J]. 2007, 27(2):132-138.
 TAN Yinghui. Research on Techniques, Methods, and Decision Support for Industrial Land Regulation in
Large City- Taking Guangzhou as an example [J]. GEOMATICS WORLD, 2010, 05: 54-62+68.
 GE Yongjun，QIU Xiaoyan，WANG Feihu，FAN Zhongming. Approaches and Practice of Old Industrial
Estate Renewal in Nanshan District Shenzhen [J]. Urban Development Studies, 2013, 08:113-117.
 HE Chuanjiao, WANG Xu, ZOU Bing. Spatial Integration of Industrial and Multiple Urban Functions [J].
urban_planning Forum, 2012, 05:30-36.
 Eizaguirre, Santiago. Pradel, Marc. Terrones, Albert. Martinez-Celorrio, Xavier. Garcia, Marisol. Multilevel
Governance and Social Cohesion: Bringing Back Conflict in Citizenship Practices [J]. URBAN STUDIES,
2012, 49(9):1999-2016.

Abstract Index #: 653
INTENSIFICATION TRAJECTORIES IN CANADIAN AND AMERICAN city
Abstract System ID#: 399
Individual Paper
TAYLOR, Zack [University of Toronto] zack.taylor@utsc.utoronto.ca
Contemporary planning policy views the intensification, or infill and redevelopment, of existing urbanized area
as an important planning goal. Substantial sums of public and private money are spent on the replacement and
expansion of infrastructure system and facilities in order to attract private investment in the construction and
renovation of new buildings and amenities. Implicit in this assumption is that physical intensification -- the
construction of additional housing units -- will lead to an increase in the number of residents consuming local
public and private services. This may not in fact be the case. Long-term decline in average household size means
that fewer people occupy the same number of dwellings. To “break even” -- in other words, to maintain the
population of established urban area -- therefore requires an increase in the number of dwellings, while
population growth would require the construction of even more units.
To examine the long-term impact of this phenomenon in American and Canadian city between 1970 and 2010, I
analyzed census data for all metropolitan area of over 200,000 residents in 1970. (U.S. census tract data were
obtained from private data vendor Geolytics, which has produced population and dwelling counts for each
census year within 2010 boundaries. Equivalent Canadian data were drawn from government sources.) Each
metropolitan area was divided into zones that were predominantly built out in the pre-1945, early postwar
(1945-70), and post-1970 periods. For the first two zones in each metropolitan area, I first quantified population
and dwelling unit gain or loss in each intercensal period. I then calculate the “break-even” amount for each zone

in each decade -- how many dwellings would have had to have been constructed to compensate for decline in
average household size. Finally, I show which metropolitan area broke even, which did not, and by how much. I
conclude that Canadian metropolitan area were much more likely to break even than American ones, especially
in their pre-1945 zones. This may be the result of stricter regulatory limits on outer suburban expansion.
This large-N study expands on an exploratory study of urban growth patterns in four Canadian city (Taylor et al.
2014) and supplements other large-N longitudinal studies of metropolitan-scale urban development patterns that
focus on density and suburban land consumption (e.g. Paulsen 2014; Lopez & Hynes 2003).
References
 Taylor, Zack, Marcy Burchfield, and Anna Kramer. 2014. Alberta city at the Crossroads: Urban
Development Challenges and Opportunities in Historical and Comparative Perspective. Vol. 7, Issue 12,
School of Public Policy Research Paper. Calgary: University of Calgary.
 Paulsen, Kurt. (2014). Geography, policy or market? New evidence on the measurement and causes of
sprawl (and infill) in U.S. metropolitan regions. Urban Studies, 51(12), 2629–2645.
 Lopez, Russell, & Hynes, H. Patricia. (2003). Sprawl In The 1990s: Measurement, Distribution, and
Trends. Urban Affairs Review, 38(3), 325–355.

Abstract Index #: 654
REGIONAL INEQUALITY OF LOCAL FISCAL EFFORT: THE IMPORTANCE OF STATE POLICY
Abstract System ID#: 403
Pre-organized Session: Understanding Urban Austerity – Fiscal Crisis and the Role of the State
XU, Yuanshuo [Cornell University] yx246@cornell.edu, presenting author, primary author
WARNER, Mildred [Cornell University] mew15@cornell.edu
Decentralization has increased city reliance on locally raised revenue to provide basic social, infrastructural and
economic development services. With growing obligations for redistributive expenditure and fiscal stress on local
government, it is especially important to examine how local fiscal effort varies under a system of decentralization
and austerity. Due to disparities between local need and capacity, the landscape for local government fiscal effort
is diverse and spatially unequal. State policy through state aid and state fiscal decentralization may promote
regional equity, or through limitations on fiscal effort, may worsen local fiscal inequality. The fiscal behaviors of
both local and state, and their interactions, have  impact on local service provision and economic growth.
This research conducts a study of local government fiscal effort of all county area in the continental United
States using panel data from 2002 to 2012 to assess how local fiscal effort has functioned and responded to the
challenge of decentralization and austerity. Particular attention is given to the  impact of state fiscal policy on
local fiscal effort. Multilevel regression models are used to control for state effects. Spatial regression models are
also employed to correct for spatial autocorrelation. We also conduct geographically weighted regression (GWR)
to understand the geographic diversity of local effort functions, and spatially varied  impact of state policy
across counties.
Our models show local effort is driven primarily by local need, not growth. The increased redistributive
expenditure limits local budget for economic development. Local fiscal stress is in the counties with greatest
need. Nonmetropolitan nonadjacent rural area and inner ring suburbs exhibit higher local effort while
metropolitan outlying area have lower effort. This raises spatial inequality concerns for planners. We find state
policy is especially important in addressing local fiscal inequality. State centralization of expenditure obligation
for localities has functioned primarily as a substitute, helping relieve local fiscal stress; while state aid ironically,
promotes local competition for grants, causing greater local effort. GWR models unfold the  impact of state
policy across space and demonstrate positive and negative effects on local effort depending on county type and
location. Planners should give more attention to the structure of state aid and state centralization to ensure that
both redistributive and developmental expenditures can be maintained under decentralization, especially for
rural and inner ring suburban counties.

References
 Kneebone, E. & Berube, A. (2013). Confronting Suburban Poverty in America. Washington, DC: Brookings
Institution Press
 Macleod G. & Goodwin M. (1999). Space, Scale and State strategy: Rethinking Urban and Regional
Governance. Progress in Human Geography, 23(4), 503–527.
 Lobao, L. M. & Adua, L. (2011). State Rescaling and Local Governments' Austerity policy Across the
USA, 2001-2008. Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, 4(3), 419-435.
 Warner, M. E., & Pratt, J. E. (2005). Spatial Diversity in Local Government Revenue Effort Under
Decentralization: A Neural-Network Approach. Environment and Planning.C, Government & Policy,
23(5), 657-678.
 Warner, M. (2001). State Policy Under Devolution: Redistribution and Centralization. National Tax
Journal, 54(3), 541-556.

Abstract Index #: 655
MAKING SENSE OF THE METROPOLIS - THREE NARRATIVES FROM THREE CONTINENTS
Abstract System ID#: 418
Individual Paper
BOYLE, Robin [Wayne State University] r.boyle@wayne.edu
The metropolis or metropolitan region appears to be on the crest of a scholarly and policy wave. Janssen-Jansen
and Hutton (2011) write: ”in an increasingly globalizing world, the status of being a metropolis seem to be
attractive and perhaps even a necessity”. Miller and Fox have a new book – “Governing the Metropolitan RegionAmerica’s New Frontier” (emphasis added). To quote from Katz and Bradley, (2013) “(T)he metropolis is
humanity’s greatest collective act of invention and imagination. Our city and metropolitan area–and the
networks of individuals and institutions who lead them–are charting a new path forward and leading what is, in
essence, an affirmative campaign for national renewal”. And Katz and Moro write: “going forward, moreover,
U.S. economic policy and implementation will be increasingly ‘co-developed’ with city, counties, metropolitan
economic organizations, state governments, and the private sector”. Is this breathless rhetoric backed-up by
reality? What is happening on the ground?
With a focus on local economic development and spatial strategy and drawing on three metropolitan regions in
different continents: Detroit, Michigan, USA; the Ruhr, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany; and Melbourne, State
of Victoria, Australia, this paper seeks to address four questions: [1] How has metropolitan governance evolved in
these three urban regions in the past forty years? [2] Is there evidence that Katz and Moro’s “co-development”
concept has taken root in these spaces? [3] What and/or who are the contemporary drivers of metro-scale
economic and spatial policy? [4] Do these cases studies illustrate effective metropolitan strategic economic
development planning and management and what lessons can be drawn for policy exchange with other metros.
References
 Janssen-Jansen, L.B. and Hutton, T.A. (2011) Rethinking the Metropolis: Reconfiguring the Governance
Structures of the Twenty-first-century City-region, International Planning Studies, 16:3: 201-215.
 Katz, B. and Bradley, J. (2013) The Metropolitan Revolution – How city and Metros Are Fixing Our
Broken Politics and Fragile Economy. Washington, D.C., Brooking Institution Press.
 Katz, B. and Muro, M (2012) Remaking Federalism: Resetting Federal Policy to Recharge the Economy,
Stabilize the Budget, and Unleash State and Metropolitan Innovation. Washington DC, Brookings
Institution.
 Miller, David Y. and Cox, Raymond W. (2014) Governing the Metropolitan Region – America’s New
Frontier. London and New York, Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 656
CLIMATE CHANGE AND SPATIAL INEQUALITY OF VULNERABLE LABORS IN KOREA
Abstract System ID#: 449
Poster
LEE, Heonyeong [Korea Environment Institute] leehy@kei.re.kr, presenting author
KIM, Donghyun [Korea Environment Institute] donghyunkim@kei.re.kr
While it is assumed that climate change has far-reaching  impact on every individual in a society, the degree of
influence of climate change experienced by individuals is discriminatory. Individuals who experience particularly
heavy damage on climate change can be defined as vulnerable class and the vulnerability have a functional
relationship with an exposure to climate change, a sensitivity, and an adaptive capacity of individual. In this
context, previous studies draw children, elderly, disabled, and low-income group as vulnerable classes of climate
change, since these individuals are generally inferior in terms of biological adaptability, as well as socioeconomic
status. However, considering the fact that these classifications of climate change vulnerable class overlook what
people really do as a part of their daily economic activity, the limitation of previous approaches is substantial.
To complement previous limitation, this study attempts to explore vulnerable groups in terms of health and
safety, and their spatial distributions based on individual characteristics of economic activities. The "occupation"
performs a central role in this study as a representative measure of individual economic activities. Where the
linkage between the occupation and the climate change vulnerability made are three points; 1) People who are
engaged in a same occupation, share similar characteristics on working time and place of work which have a
direct relationship with the level of exposure to climate change. 2) In the same way, the same occupational
group has similar characteristic on the sensitivity to climate change measured by risks factors of occupation, as
well as 3) the adaptive capacity which can be measured by employment conditions, such as monthly wage and
educational attainment, in common.
Considering that there is a lack of reference studies, we take a data-driven approach employing the Korea
Working Condition Survey (KWCS) data. The analysis process is composed of two steps. In the first step, we
identify vulnerable occupations, those with relatively negative anticipated outcomes on health and safety. We
draw a vulnerability index of the individual occupation's characteristics – working time and place of work,
physical risk factors, and employment conditions of occupation – and identify the vulnerable occupations by
selecting occupations with an index that is lower than 25% on at least two occupational characteristics. Through
this process, we finally identify 27 occupations as vulnerable, which correspond to 16.5 percent of the total
number of occupations. At the second step, we explore a spatial distribution of occupations vulnerable to climate
change. As an exploratory spatial data analysis method, Local Moran’s I index was investigated. Through the
results, we find that there are spatial clusters of vulnerable occupations well matched with economically less
favored regions in Korea.

Abstract Index #: 657
ACCESSIBILITY PLANNING IN AMERICAN METROPOLITAN area: ARE WE THERE YET?
Abstract System ID#: 483
Individual Paper
PROFFITT, David [University of Utah] david.proffitt@utah.edu, presenting author, primary author
BARTHOLOMEW, Keith [University of Utah] bartholomew@arch.utah.edu
EWING, Reid [University of Utah] ewing@arch.utah.edu
MILLER, Harvey [The Ohio State University] miller.81@osu.edu
A renewed focus on urban sustainability, particularly the need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions causing
climate change, are driving transportation planners to seek out more flexible approaches than the current focus
on congestion reduction on roadways. For at least two decades, academicians and others interested in planning
policy have advocated the use of accessibility, the ease of reaching important destinations by many travel modes,

as a framework for transportation planning. This position has grown out of a perceived tendency for federally
mandated long-range transportation plans (LRTPs) to focus exclusively on mobility, i.e. the ease of travelling
farther and faster via an ever-expanding network of roadways and transit routes. Because the concept of
accessibility incorporates both mobility and  land_use (proximity), it has been posited as the logical end goal of a
transportation network. The asserted benefits of using an accessibility framework include planning outcomes
that succeed in reducing vehicle travel and associated  impact on energy consumption, air quality, and societal
and personal costs. Despite these purported advantages, the adoption of an accessibility framework by
transportation planning agencies has been slow.
This study assesses the current state of accessibility in planning practice. The study presents a content analysis of
42 long-range transportation plans recently adopted by metropolitan planning organizations from a
representative range of U.S. metropolitan area. The analysis tests the degree to which the plans incorporate
accessibility-related planning goals, use accessibility as a criterion for selecting transportation projects, and
employ accessibility as a measurement of plan effectiveness. The resulting index shows the current state of
practice in the United States by quantifying how the components of each LRTP contribute to an overall focus on
accessibility. Taking this a step further, we isolate the metropolitan-area characteristics that are most useful in
predicting performance on the accessibility index using a multivariate regression tree that groups and classifies
MPOs by reducing variance among key variables. Accessibility orientation also is linked to planning outcomes,
namely vehicle miles traveled, through the use of a structural equation model that quantifies the influence of
accessibility along multiple causal pathways while controlling for potentially confounding variables.
The results of the content analysis show that, while accessibility continues to lag behind other planning concepts,
some MPOs are starting to advance accessibility-based themes in their transportation plans, particularly those
from larger population metro area. The regression tree analysis reveals other key predictors of high accessibility
index scores, including per capita income within the MPO service area, per capita lane miles, and per capita VMT.
Predictors of lower accessibility index scores include per capita transit revenue miles, and the location of the
MPO as defined by U.S. Census region. Finally, structural equation model results indicate a strong relationship
between an LRTP's accessibility orientation and per capita VMT within the MPO service area along multiple
pathways. These results provide a snapshot of the state of practice among American MPOs. They also suggest
that focusing LRTPs on improving accessibility (rather than on mobility exclusively) may reduce VMT, greenhouse
gas emissions, roadway infrastructure expenditures, and facilitate other planning goals. Furthermore, the results
begin to chart a path for achieving these goals by highlighting metros that score highly on the accessibility index
and identifying variables that predict performance. The study is the first to take a systematic approach to
analyzing the accessibility-related content of regional transportation plans, and the experience of these MPOs
could inform implementation of anticipated new performance-based planning regulations based on the federal
surface transportation act, Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century.

Abstract Index #: 658
FARMLAND PRESERVATION BEYOND THE FRINGE? PLANNING GOALS IN REMOTE RURAL comminuty
Abstract System ID#: 526
Individual Paper
MILLS, Sarah [University of Michigan] sbmills@umich.edu
Within rural planning scholarship, there have historically been two distinct area of research, each targeting a
different “rural America” (Daniels and Lapping 1996). The first rural America includes comminuty at the
metropolitan fringe that wish to remain rural in the face of urbanization pressures, where planning efforts largely
revolve around  land_use policy that discourage development. While more broadly known as growth
management, in agricultural comminuty such goals are referred to as “farmland preservation.” The second
rural America is comprised of more remote places where the population is declining, and where planning efforts
have focused on rural economic development and small town revitalization. Even in remote places where
agriculture predominates, planning policy to counteract out-migration are not referred to as “farmland
preservation” within planning scholarship.

In practice, though, do rural comminuty make such distinctions? This paper draws upon qualitative data from
interviews with 20+ elected officials and planning commission chairpersons in rural jurisdictions across Michigan
with stagnant or declining populations. The paper further contextualizes these interviews with US Census and
USDA Census of Agriculture data, as well as content drawn from each jurisdiction’s Master Plan.
The paper finds that even in comminuty where the most pressing concerns of local officials are related to an
aging population and youth flight, “farmland preservation” is still a term which resonates with interviewees and
that is commonly used within their master plans. Interview data shows that local officials define farmland
preservation not as preventing urbanization, but convincing a younger generation to take up farming, thus
keeping the land within the family rather than selling it to a non-related neighboring farmer. Further, while these
officials aim to achieve their vision of “farmland preservation” by increasing local economic opportunities as is
recommended in the planning literature for remote rural comminuty, they aim to do so not through traditional
economic development policy but through  land_use policy, minimizing restrictions on how landowners can use
their property to allow entrepreneurial landowners to diversify farm income streams.
Such a finding not only blurs the lines about the differentiation between the “two rural Americas,” but invites
conversation about whether there are tools that might be appropriate for both. It also invites rural planning
scholars to take a fresh look at how rural comminuty are framing their planning goals and adapting planning
tools to fit their local context.
References
 Bunce, M. (1998). Thirty years of farmland preservation in North America: Discourses and ideologies of a
movement. Journal of Rural Studies, 14(2), 233–247. doi:10.1016/S0743-0167(97)00035-1
 Daniels, T. L., & Lapping, M. B. (1996). The Two Rural Americas Need More, Not Less Planning. Journal of
the American Planning Association, 62(3), 285–288.
 Hamin, E. M., & Marcucci, D. J. (2008). Ad hoc rural regionalism. Journal of Rural Studies, 24(4), 467–477.
doi:10.1016/j.jrurstud.2008.03.009
 Pruetz, R. (2012). Lasting Value: Open space planning and preservation successes. Chicago: American
Planning Association.

Abstract Index #: 659
ECOLOGICAL AND ECONOMICAL COOPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT OF CITY-CLUSTERS AT THE URBANIZATION
RATIO OVER 50%
Abstract System ID#: 631
Individual Paper
XU, Xingjing [Tongii University] 06_xuxinjing@tongji.edu.cn
The 21 century is an urban century. Since 2010, over half the world’s populations are living in urban area. This
trend will continue: the urbanization rate will reach 60% by 2030 and 70% by 2050. Urbanization, as a natural
consequence of urban development, can generate economic growth and national prosperity, but meanwhile, can
also lead to social instability and environment destruction.
After an overall survey on the history of the regional development in the urbanization process of city in Yangtze
River Delta in China the paper reveals the fact that city in this region have entered the stage of fast
development of inter-city coordination and the rapid expansion of urban space when this region strides over the
urbanization ratio of 50% (in 2000). Although this region had not been exposed to the cultural environment of
and strong institutional support for inter-city coordination in the long history, the inter-city coordination has
been realized through joint environment governance, joint infrastructure construction, joint  land_use and
development, and regional knowledge innovation cooperation.

Thus, the spatial features of inter-city coordination can be summarized as the following major aspects: the timesequence that the some city would become well-off in a faster pace than the rest and push forward the
development of others; the adjacency of city in coordinated development; and the network features caused by
the coordinated development of infrastructure and knowledge innovation. The thesis reveals that, after reaching
the urbanization ratio of 50%, the coordination between city in Yangtze River Delta has evolved from the
budding phase to fast development. city are increasingly concerned with both the integrity and differentials of
urban coordination. And the spatial development of coordination has proven the trends from multi-nodes
development mode to network mode with multiple layers, and from physical spatial coordination to virtual
spatial coordination.
References
 WU Zhiqiang, YANG Xiu, LIU Wei Intelligent Urbanization or Labor Urbanization: Strategic Thinking on
Urbanization Path of China urban_planning Forum, 2015.01, p15-23.
 WU Zhiqaing, YANG Xiu, LIU Guangpeng Thinking About Urban Ecology at the Turning point as
Urbanization Rate Reaches to 50% Chinese urban_planning Yearbook（2013-2014）, 2014. Beijing:
China Architecture & Building Press p51-58，2014.09.
 Maureen CAMPBELL, Matthew COOPER, Kathryn FRIEDMAN, William ANDERSON, The economy as a
driver of change in the Great Lakes–St. Lawrence River basin, Journal of Great Lakes Research, 2015.01
 WANG Wei, Research on Spatia Structure and its Integrated Efficiency of Yangtze River Delta, Pearl River
Delta and
 Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei Urban Agglomeration in China, Tongji University Doctoral Dissertation in 2008

Abstract Index #: 660
PLANNING ALONE: THE PROVISION OF  land_use, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, AND OTHER PLANNING
SERVICES
Abstract System ID#: 705
Individual Paper
HOMSY, George [Binghamton University] ghomsy@binghamton.edu
Central Theme: Regional governance is an institutional arrangement that orders economic, political,
environmental, and/or social policymaking across municipal boundaries. It is an attempt to bring representatives
together to adopt a broader geographic and longer-term view of their own interests (Scott, 2007). Planners have
long recognized that issues such as  land_use, transportation, environment protection, metropolitan growth,
affordable housing and economic development cannot be managed well in a fragmented region. When
communities act alone, studies show that municipalities and counties face important challenges, such as capacity,
coordination across a region, and the problem of spillovers and negative externalities (Pastor, Lester, & Scoggins,
2009; Warner, 2011). This increases inequity across regions and sometimes enables suburbs to shoulder a lower
tax burden as they benefit from the service spillovers of urban core comminuty (Orfield, 2002). Norris, Phares,
and Zimmerman (2009) describe a broader governance structure that would tackle issues through voluntary
cooperation among major governmental and non-governmental players. Intermunicipal cooperation for and
privatization of most municipal public services are well studied, but the role of planning within that sphere is not
– especially outside of major metropolitan regions. In this paper, I examine the extent to which municipalities
provide each of four broad planning services (comprehensive planning,  land_use review, affordable housing, and
economic development) and the manner in which each is delivered.
Methodology and results: Every five years since 1992, local municipalities and counties have responded to a
survey about the services they provide and the manner in which they are provided. For the first time in 2012, the
survey included four questions about planning specific services: comprehensive planning,  land_use review,
affordable housing, and economic development. Using this database of local governments (n=1,715), I find that a
majority of local governments engage in comprehensive and economic development planning as well as  land_use
review. Fewer than half of municipalities and counties undertake affordable housing planning. Second, most local
governments in the United States engage in planning efforts on their own, despite the documented advantages

of regionalizing efforts. Cooperation between local governments is most noticeable in affordable housing
planning, an issue around which one-third of places report working with other governments. Contracting out to
either non-profit or for-profit organizations is very low in comprehensive planning and  land_use review, but
higher for economic development and affordable housing. Multilevel regression models are used to examine the
factors correlating to service provision, intermunicipal cooperation, and privatization. The results provide a
national benchmark of planning in these four broad area.
Relevance: For decades, planners have discussed the value of regional planning for many issues. Despite that
understanding, this research finds that planners continue to limit their efforts to individual jurisdictions. More
efforts need to be undertaken to break down the political, legal and institutional barriers that curtail regional
planning efforts in core area of the practice.
References
 Norris, D. F., Phares, D., & Zimmerman, T. (2009). Metropolitan Government in the United States: Not
Now... Not Likely. In D. Phares (Ed.), Governing Metropolitan Regions in the 21st Century (pp. 11–38).
Armonk, New York: M.E. Sharpe.
 Orfield, M. (2002). American Metropolitics: The New Suburban Reality. Washington, DC: Brookings
Institution Press.
 Pastor, M., Lester, T. W., & Scoggins, J. (2009). Why Regions? Why Now? Who Cares? Journal of Urban
Affairs, 31(3), 269–296.
 Scott, W. (2007). Smart Growth as Urban Reform: A Pragmatic’Recoding’of the New Regionalism. Urban
Studies, 44(1), 15–35.
 Warner, M. E. (2011). Competition or cooperation in urban service delivery? Annals of Public and
Cooperative Economics, 82(4), 421–435.

Abstract Index #: 661
POLICY THROUGH PRACTICE: THE ROLE OF REGIONAL INTERMEDIARIES AND DISTRIBUTED NETWORKS IN
INSTITUTIONAL INNOVATION AT THE CITY SCALE
Abstract System ID#: 734
Pre-organized Session: Inclusive Innovation
CLARK, Jennifer [Georgia Institute of Technology] jennifer.clark@gatech.edu
The role of institutional intermediaries in shaping regional competiveness is not a new subject of inquiry in urban
planning. Most recent theoretical turns in the discipline have emphasized the role of institutions. However, the
theoretical literature has not yet led to a body of empirical work illustrating the policy implications to a broader
regional planning audience with tangible examples. What becomes clear is that these intermediaries defy easy
categorization and are explicitly tied to governance in city-regions.
This paper identifies three models of these emerging distributed institutional networks promoting innovative
urban governance both within and outside the public sector. The first model uses philanthropic funding to seed
new capacity through technical assistance and staff in city governments. The second model uses bottom-up selforganizing facilitated through loose networks of best practice exchange (civic innovation) outside the public
sector. The third model uses a franchise approach to capacity development through multi-scalar coalitions.
Common among these models is the use of networked institutions to facilitate city-scale adoption of innovative
practices. Common too is that these new approaches privilege city and skip over states. They also bypass the
metropolitan regionalism debates of the past and focus directly on the city as the priority space for political and
economic engagement. In other words, these networked models, and particularly the emergence of new forms
of “civic innovation”, indicate more that a renewed interest in urban policy. They signal a new model of
governance through institutional innovation at the city scale.

References
 Clark, Jennifer (2014) Manufacturing by Design: The Rise of Regional Intermediaries and the
Reemergence of Collective Action. Special Issue on Reindustrializing Regions: Rebuilding the
Manufacturing Economy? Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society. (November) 7 (3): 433448.
 Laura Wolf-Powers. "Understanding community development in a “theory of action” framework: Norms,
markets, justice" Planning Theory and Practice 15.2 (2014): 202-219.
 Clark, Jennifer and Susan Christopherson (2009) Integrating Investment and Equity: A Critical Regionalist
Agenda for a Progressive Regionalism. Journal of Planning Education and Research (JPER), Journal of the
Association of Collegiate Schools of Planning. Vol. 28: Issue 3. pp. 341-354.
 Clavel, Pierre (1986) The Progressive City. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.

Abstract Index #: 662
BAY AREA TRANSPORTATION JUSTICE ADVOCACY: TWO DECADES OF STRUGGLE AND INNOVATION
Abstract System ID#: 744
Individual Paper
KARNER, Alex [Arizona State University] alex.karner@asu.edu, presenting author, primary author
GOLUB, Aaron [Arizona State Unversity] aaron.golub@asu.edu
The San Francisco Bay Area has been an important site for transportation justice activism and advocacy dating
back at least to the construction of the Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) system in the 1960s. Analysis at that time
determined that low-income taxpayers were disproportionately subsidizing higher-income BART riders. Over the
past two decades, advocates for equitable transportation funding, civil rights, and environment justice have
become increasingly active participants in the regional transportation planning process in the Bay Area. Recent
lawsuits and administrative complaints have criticized an expensive airport connector project and the relative
funding of rail versus local modes of transportation.
Although they wield relatively little authority in terms of funding or  land_use, a number of developments have
made regional transportation planning agencies a sensible locus for advocacy. Specifically, the region is the
geographic scale at which patterns of inequity manifest in the form of gentrification and displacement,
segregation, jobs-housing imbalance, and spatial mismatch. As such, regions are the appropriate scale at which to
redress these concerns. Additionally, they offer the promise of governance free from the parochial concerns of
cities and counties, where the needs of real estate developers often hold inordinate sway. Finally, in California,
the state’s smart growth law SB 375 endows regional agencies with additional authority vis-à-vis the coordination
of  land_use, transportation, and housing planning. SB 375 envisions sustainable regions undergirded by smart
growth principles and will likely result in increased investment in central city; however, the law is silent on
equity  impact. As a result both advocates and philanthropic organizations are seeking to ensure that SB 375’s
benefits and burdens are distributed fairly across the population. Their voices are vital for elevating the
consideration of equity and justice in a process in which it would otherwise be absent.
In this paper, we document the efforts of Bay Area activists over the past two decades to transcend traditional
avenues for public participation at regional transportation and  land_use planning agencies. Whereas the regional
agencies emphasize the creation of an open and inclusive public process and support the establishment of
advisory committees, advocates seek to reprioritize programming and planning decisions with the goal of
minimizing harm and maximizing benefits to low-income comminuty and comminuty of color. To accomplish
these aims, advocates are drawing on an increasingly sophisticated toolkit composed of both interactions with
the agencies during formal public participation meetings as well as traditional community organizing measures
and developing their own counter-narratives using the agency’s data in partnership with academic planners
working in university settings. We document advocacy efforts focused in two area: 1) the definition of model
inputs used to define alternative transportation- land_use scenarios and 2) the creation of equity-oriented
performance analyses that more accurately capture the  impact of plans on low-income people and people of
color. Most recently, advocates have begun to incorporate traditional environment sustainability concerns into

their work around equity and justice, creating plans and analyses that highlight the synergies that can emerge
when both outcomes are sought together.
The authors draw upon their own experiences partnering with advocates, interviews, and analyses of primary
data sources including reports, memoranda, regional plans, and other correspondence to make the case that
what is happening in the Bay Area represents a truly innovative instance of public participation and advocacy. We
conclude by drawing general principles from the history that can inform efforts to achieve sustainable and just
transportation and  land_use system across the US and elsewhere.
References
 Golub, A., R. A. Marcantonio and T. W. Sanchez (2013). "Race, Space, and Struggles for Mobility:
Transportation  impact on African Americans in Oakland and the East Bay." Urban Geography 34(5):
699-728.
 Grengs, J. (2002). "Community-Based Planning as a Source of Political Change: The Transit Equity
Movement of Los Angeles' Bus Riders Union." Journal of the American Planning Association 68(2): 165178.
 Innes, J. E. and J. Gruber (2005). "Planning Styles in Conflict: The Metropolitan Transportation
Commission." Journal of the American Planning Association 71(2): 177-188.
 Karner, A. and D. Niemeier (2013). "Civil rights guidance and equity analysis methods for regional
transportation plans: a critical review of literature and practice." Journal of transportation Geography 33:
126-134.
 Marcantonio, R. and A. Karner (2014). "Disadvantaged comminuty Teach Regional Planners a Lesson in
Equitable and Sustainable Development." Poverty & Race 23(1): 5-12.

Abstract Index #: 663
MAPPING THE ENTREPRENEURIAL ECOSYSTEM
Abstract System ID#: 749
Individual Paper
HARPER-ANDERSON, Elsie [Virginia Commonwealth University] elharperande@vcu.edu
Entrepreneurship has been the cornerstone of economic recovery strategies in many US city. In order to foster
growth, an increasing amount of policy and programming at the federal, state, and local levels has been focused
on promoting and nurturing new businesses. Scholars have turned their attention to understanding the broader
context or the entrepreneurial ecosystem that nurtures innovation and entrepreneurship. The concept of
entrepreneurial ecosystems is relatively new. According to Nambison & Baron (2013), an ecosystem is "an
economic community supported by a foundation of interacting organizations - the organisms of the business
world". Several scholars have theorized about which components (actors, institutions and local policy conditions)
are important for viable or successful ecosystems (see Isenberg 2010, Iansiti and Levien, 2004, Neck et al., 2004).
Although, both Isenberg (2010) and Wood (2012) have acknowledged the importance of the interconnectedness
between components, few studies have examined these connections in a systematic way. Both the components
in a given ecosystem and the nature of their connection are driven by local conditions. What is missing in the
literature is a comprehensive analysis of ecosystem components, the connections between them and an
understanding of how models vary across differing regional contexts.
This study has two key research questions:
1.
2.

What actors, institutions, and other stakeholders play a role in the entrepreneurial ecosystems in each
region? What value is each component contributing to the system as a whole?
Is the current entrepreneurial ecosystem in each region meeting the specific needs of its entrepreneurs?

This research uses survey and interview data from Chicago, Pittsburgh and Richmond to build case studies which
“map” the entrepreneurial ecosystems in each of those regions. Pittsburgh is heavily invested in

entrepreneurship and innovation and has devoted substantial resources to reforming its economy in an attempt
to attract and grow innovation centered, medical and technology oriented firms. This case provides an interesting
example of “purposeful” and intentional ecosystem development. Chicago is a second tier global city known for
its intense political climate. The city boasts one of the most active entrepreneurial comminuty in the US
particularly for minorities. Yet the Chicago entrepreneurship mentality is cutthroat competition. Understanding
how these conditions manifest in resource distribution and system building among various institutions raises
interesting question for the Chicago model. Richmond, Virginia is a fledgling ecosystem with an economy that has
been driven largely by tobacco money and government contracts (just over 100 miles from Washington DC), this
city was relatively late to join the push for actively building an entrepreneurship infrastructure and thus
represents an early stage ecosystem which is still evolving.
Interview, focus group, and survey data is combined to conduct a social network analysis of the key stakeholders
(individuals and institutions) and how their interactions shape the entrepreneurial ecosystem in each region.
More specifically, I critically asses the value-added of each major component or stakeholder in enhancing their
system’s capacity for innovation and firm growth. I also identify the core nodes of actors and identify any cliques
and/or silos among stakeholders involved. Survey and interview responses are also be used to map the flow of
information and resources through the system.
Understanding the various models of contemporary ecosystems could have profound implications for the ways
we engage key actors, formulate local policy, and distribute important resources to maximize results.
References
 Neck H, Meyer D, Cohen B, Corbett A. 2004. An entrepreneurial system view of new venture creation.
Journal of Small Business Management 42(2): 190–208.
 Nambison, S. & Baron, R.A. (2013). Entrepreneurship in innovation ecosystems: Entrepreneurs' selfregulatory processes and their implications for new venture success. Entrepreneurship: Theory and
Practice, 37 (5), 1071-1097.
 Iansiti M, Levien R. 2004. Strategy as ecology. Harvard Business Review 82(3): 68–79.
 Isenberg, D.J. (2010). How to start an entrepreneurial revolution. Harvard Business Review, 88(6) 40-50
 Wood, C. (2012). Building an entrepreneurial ecosystem in northwest Florida. Economic Development
Journal, 11(1), 29-34.

Abstract Index #: 664
STARVING THE city: STATE AUSTERITY AND LOCAL POLICY RESPONSE
Abstract System ID#: 750
Pre-organized Session: Understanding Urban Austerity – Fiscal Crisis and the Role of the State
WARNER, Mildred [Cornell University] mew15@cornell.edu
The Great Recession has ushered in a new period of austerity for state and local governments. city are
especially feeling the pinch. Dependence on property tax revenues, limits placed on local government revenue
raising, and rising needs due to decaying infrastructure and demands for services have put city across the US in
a vice. Matters are made worse by state level policy that pass the fiscal crisis down to the local level. With the
exception of the short-lived stimulus package, federal support to city has not risen.
This paper explores the contours and  impact of state policy in New York and the city response. Using finance
data for the last decade from municipalities across the state and case studies of city upstate, this paper tells a
tale of cautious fiscal management, innovation in service delivery and creative approaches to economic
development at the city level.
While some urban scholars argue that the city has become an austerity machine (Peck 2012, Donald et al 2014),
we find instead that the city is a pragmatic municipal actor (Kim and Warner 2014), and the austerity regime is
more of a feature of state policy. But there is dramatic variation across the state and the extent of state fiscal

decentralization contributes to local fiscal stress and may crowd out economic development activity (Xu and
Warner 2015).
Cities in upstate New York, industrial powerhouses of a prior era, are now left with declining industries, decaying
infrastructure, outmigration of the middle class and concentrated poverty. Despite Governor Cuomo being a
former head of Housing and Urban Development under President Clinton, the state has no urban policy. Real
declines in state aid to city since the recession, a tax cap imposed in 2011 and a tax freeze passed in 2014 starve
the city of resources and force cuts to the core program that provide the foundation for quality of life and
future economic growth.
References
 Donald, B., Glasmeier, A., Gray, M., & Lobao, L. (2014). Austerity in the city: economic crisis and urban
service decline? Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, 7(1), 3-15.
 Kim, Yunji, and Mildred Warner (2014). Pragmatic Municipalism: Local Government Service Delivery in
the Great Recession, paper under review.
 Peck, J. (2012). Austerity urbanism. City, 16(6), 626-655.
 Xu, Yuanshuo and Mildred Warner, 2015, “Understanding Employment Growth in the Recession: The
Geographic Diversity of State Rescaling,” Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, special
issue on Local Growth Evolutions: Recession, Resilience and Recovery, doi:10.1093/cjres/rsv001
Abstract Index #: 665
GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS IN STICKY PLACES: APPRENTICESHIP IN THE U.S. SOUTH
Abstract System ID#: 754
Individual Paper
FORBES, Allison [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] allisonf@live.unc.edu
Since at least the 1960’s, scholars have studied the effect of global trends on regional economies and the way
that regional institutional structures mitigate the effects of these global trends (Campbell 2004). This paper
follows in this tradition by asking how transnational firms have shaped labor market institutions in the U.S. South
and Mexico, with a focus on the advent of apprenticeship program.
Public and private actors in North America’s high-tech manufacturing clusters have implemented unique
education and skill development program that transition students from school to work in a high-tech industry.
Several prominent program utilize an apprenticeship model based on Germany’s vocational training system,
prioritize partnerships between businesses and community colleges, and exclude the traditional role of labor
unions. In the last five years, these program have been integrated with pre-existing statewide registered
apprenticeship program in North Carolina and South Carolina and the national public education system in
Mexico.
In this paper, I present comparative case studies on the densely clustered automotive supply chains in central
Mexico and the U.S. South (clusters near Volkswagen in Chattanooga, Tennessee, and in Puebla, Puebla, Mexico)
to describe how transnational firms in the North American automotive industry have designed and promoted
apprenticeship program in partnership with metropolitan and state actors. My research addresses two
questions: 1) When and how do lead manufacturing firms and smaller, co-located firms in the automotive supply
chain engage in regional institution building to facilitate multi-firm training models? 2) How do different models
operate and why are some more widely adopted than others? This paper finds that while larger firms contribute
to and benefit from apprenticeship program, it is the smaller firms that engage with regional actors to design
and develop multi-firm training program.
Studies of labor practices in global industries in the last decade have highlighted the power of lead firms (like
Volkswagen and BMW), leaving the role of smaller export-oriented firms underdeveloped. Studying supply chain
and cluster dynamics in regional economies facilitates an understanding of how these actors participate in

regional development (Christopherson & Clark 2007). Industrial district typologies help identify various roles for
transnational corporations in regional development strategies (Markusen 1996).
While there seems to be a degree of convergence in the design and implementation of apprenticeship program,
the development pathways are embedded in unique regional contexts with unique regional outcomes. In
addition to publicly available labor market data, state and local administrative data, and web-accessible
information on firm activities, I develop each case study through a series of in-depth interviews (n~30 at each
study site) that probe the various connections between firms (lead manufacturing firms and 1st tier suppliers),
educational institutions (high school and community college administrators), and government agencies affecting
regional governance. Direct observation of training venues, and brief, structured interviews with participants
(n~30 at each study site) also contribute to a detailed understanding of the unique apprenticeship models in each
industrial cluster.
In summary, I integrate the analytical power of global value chain and cluster analysis to better understand
program development processes and the implications for regional planning. This paper contributes to a larger
body of work regarding how local actors shape regional labor markets in the context of globalization. The
contribution of export-oriented multi-national firms to public policymaking in the American South, including the
diffusion and adaptation of the German apprenticeship model, may demonstrate new avenues for policy change.
References
 Barrientos, Stephanie, Gary Gereffi, and Arianna Rossi. 2011. “Economic and Social Upgrading in Global
Production Networks: A New Paradigm for a Changing World.” International Labour Review 150 (3-4):
319–40.
 Campbell, J. L. 2004. Institutional Change and Globalization. Princeton University Press.
 Christopherson, Susan, and Jennifer Clark. 2007. “The Politics of Firm Networks: How Large Firm Power
Limits Small Firm Innovation.” Geoforum 38 (1): 1–3.
 Markusen, Ann R. 1996. “Sticky Places in Slippery Space : A Typology of Industrial Districts * The Puzzle
of Stickiness in an Increasingly Slippery World.” Economic Geography 72 (3): 293–313.
 Thelen, Kathleen A. 2004. How Institutions Evolve: The Political Economy of Skills in Germany, Britain,
The United States, and Japan. Comparative Historical Analysis in the Social Sciences. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.

Abstract Index #: 666
WHY LOCAL IS NOT ENOUGH! LESSONS FROM INTERNATIONAL REGIONAL PLANNING HISTORY FOR CLIMATE
CHANGE ADAPTATION PLANNING CAPACITY
Abstract System ID#: 831
Individual Paper
PINEL, AICP, Sandra Lee [Antioch University New England] sleepinel@gmail.com, presenting author, primary
author
KLENK, Nicole [University of Toronto] nicole.klenk@utoronto.ca
TORRES-LIMA, Pablo [Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana] ptorres@correo.xoc.uam.mx
In socially complex mountain system across the Americas, indigenous peoples, migrants, and natural resource
industries compete for threatened resources. The climate change adaptation management literature recognizes
human vulnerability and diversity, and the need for equitable adaptation strategies (Armitage et al. 2009), but
relies on earlier participatory development and conservation paradigms assumptions, assuming that
decentralization of responsibility to local governments ensures inclusive participation and investment equity. UN
Habitat and climate change strategy documents equate local government capacity with inclusion through
participatory decision-making (2010) to presumably involve diverse citizens who depend on resources in
infrastructure, and land-use decisions. However, political economists and ecologists have shown that local
governments are not necessarily inclusive and equitable. Nor do they have the power and capacity to address
larger-scale and complex drivers of vulnerability and conflicts between national sectorial development policy

without institutional support (Ribot et al. 2005). Although it critical to build local government capacity meet
human needs, the international focus in the adaptive management literature on “the local” and collaborative
participation, ignores the lessons learned from fall and revival of regional planning in the US and from over eighty
years of rural regional planning theory and practice regarding spatial equity, environment governance and
institutional coordination.
In keeping with Friedmann’s call for planners to be interdisciplinary translators, the purpose of this paper is to
illustrate the importance of regional planning theory and institutions to local climate change adaptation planning
in the Americas with four cases of fragmented governance in rural and peri-urban North and South America: a
shared Andean páramo in Ecuador, Mexico City, northern Idaho, and rural eastern Canada. Due to their early and
continued influence on international territorial and spatial practice, we draw primarily on selected works of
Dennis Rondinelli, John Friedmann, and Patsy Healey to consider the role of regional planning in addressing two
challenges to local capacity in these cases – including local and indigenous institutions in plans and addressing
conflicts between national sectorial policy impacting water security. For example, Friedmann advised that we
distinguish cultural and territorial from functional regions and suggests a regional level of investments in civil
society, human needs, creative heritage, natural resources and infrastructure (Friedmann 2007). Rondinelli,
McCullough and Johnson (1989) applied their historical work to develop a political economy framework for
assessing strategies for equitable decentralization investments and for designing the relative national, regional,
and local capacities. Based on diverse social theory, Patsy Healey suggested a microanalysis of political
legitimacies for conflict management and a strategic process of institutional building that cultivates decisionmaking capacities across scales (2009). We conclude with how regional theory might guide future comparative
research on building institutions to support local governance capacity.
References
 Armitage, D. R., Plummer, R., Berkes, F., Authur, R. I., Charles, A. T., Davidson-Hunt, I. J. (2009). Adaptive
co-management for social-ecological complexity. Frontiers in Ecology and Environment 7(2): 95-102.
Frontiers in Ecology and Environment 7(2): 95-102.
 Friedmann, J. (2007). The Wealth of city: Towards an Assets‐based Development of Newly Urbanizing
Regions. Development and Change, 38(6): 987-998.
 Healey, P. (2009). In search of the “strategic” in spatial strategy making. Planning Theory and Practice
10(4): 439-457.
 Ribot, J. C., Magalhaes, S. and Panigides, S. (2005). Climate variability, climate change and social
vulnerability in the semi-annual tropics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 Rondinelli, D. A., McCullough, J. S. and Johnson, R. W. (1989), Analyzing decentralization policy in
developing countries: A political-economy framework. Development and Change 20: 57–87

Abstract Index #: 667
VARIETIES OF STRESS AND LOCAL RESPONSE: HOW DEMOGRAPHIC, ECONOMIC, AND FISCAL STRESS AFFECT
LOCAL RESTRUCTURING
Abstract System ID#: 847
Pre-organized Session: Understanding Urban Austerity – Fiscal Crisis and the Role of the State
KIM, Yunji [Cornell University] yk634@cornell.edu
With Detroit as the poster child, the capacity of city have been questioned in the aftermath of the Great
Recession. city have experienced decreasing tax base, federal aid (with the exception of the short-lived
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act), and state aid while citizen needs have increased due to increase in
unemployment and poverty. However, instead of increasing service levels to respond to increased citizen needs,
local responses have focused on restructuring and austerity measures. Some examples are restructuring
collective bargaining rights, decreasing public services, or decreasing investment in public infrastructure. In light
of these responses, some scholars have described the emergence of an austerity machine: a coalition of state and
national government actors and business and financial interests that shrink and privatize local governments. In

the austerity machine, state and national actors use devolution to push down public responsibilities while
business and financial actors use their economic power to limit government regulation.
Although austerity is a global phenomenon, scholars have also emphasized the variety of local responses, such as
acquiescence, resistance, or even “riding the wave.” The state rescaling literature argues that internal
institutional attributes are key drivers of local responses and calls for empirical verification of the extent to which
local responses follow neoliberal proscriptions. However, the state rescaling literature does not explain how
internal attributes are related to different local responses and ignores the external political and economic
system. Localities are embedded within an ecosystem of regional and state politics, national policy, geography,
and larger demographic and market pressures. Thus the alternative responses a locality can choose depends on
these constraints or sources of stress.
This paper explores how demographic, economic, and fiscal stress lead to different local responses. In particular, I
highlight the role of state policy and geography that shape the context in which localities operate. Using a 2012
nationwide survey on U.S. municipalities and service delivery, the 2012 Census of Government Finance data, and
the 2009-2013 American Community Survey data, I test a model of various types of stress and contextual factors
leading to different restructuring behavior in a structural equation model.
The findings of this study will have practical implications for city planners that are balancing several types of
internal and external stress. By clarifying the relationship among the different types of stress, I highlight the
possibilities and limitations of local responses and the importance of the larger system a locality is embedded in.
References
 Lobao, L. M., & Adua, L. (2011). State rescaling and local governments' austerity policy across the USA,
2001–2008. Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, 4(3): 419-435.
 Lovering, J. (2010). Will the recession prove to be a turning point in planning and urban development
thinking? International Planning Studies, 15(3): 227-243.
 Peck, J. (2012). Austerity urbanism: American city under extreme economy. City, 16(6): 626-655.
 Schindler, S. (2014). Detroit after bankruptcy: A case of degrowth machine politics. Urban Studies,
doi:10.1177/0042098014563485.
 Warner, M. E., & Clifton, J. (2013). Marketisation, public services and the city: the potential for Polanyian
counter movements. Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, 7(1): 45-61.

Abstract Index #: 668
STRAPPED FOR REVENUE? A MIXED-METHODS APPROACH TO UNDERSTANDING TELS, DECENTRALIZATION,
AND STATE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Abstract System ID#: 848
Pre-organized Session: Understanding Urban Austerity – Fiscal Crisis and the Role of the State
WEN, Hui [Cornell University] hw495@cornell.edu
Tax and expenditure limitations (TELs) have been shown to impose fiscal stress on certain local governments in
the US. Previous studies have demonstrated that improperly designed TELs produce regional disparities due to
insensitivity toward the unique needs and resources of localities. TELs can also increase dependence of local
governments on state aid and their vulnerability to poor state economic conditions. Increased devolution of
responsibilities can also contribute to fiscal stress, but relative little research has been done on the relationship
between TELs and decentralization. A better understanding of this relationship requires looking at the impact of
TELs at the state level.
This study develops a ranking system of TELs based on stringency or restrictiveness and examines the relationship
between TELs and state-level economic conditions. We propose that more stringent TELs are generally associated
with higher level of decentralization as well as lower performance and development capacity. The most recent
data on TELs is collected for each state and categorized by magnitude, constitutional/statutory, re-basing

frequencies, encompassment, exemptions, and override provisions. It is run against state rankings on
decentralization scores and indicators of economic conditions developed by other researchers. The results are
interpreted with the help of qualitative research on the policy content of decentralization as well as state aid and
mandate relief. This study extends the current literature on US tax policy by introducing a numerical ranking of
TELs that other researchers can use, and contributes to the understanding of austerity at the state-level and its
implications for other governance scales.
References
 Mullins, Daniel R. 2004. “Tax and Expenditure Limitations and the Fiscal Response of Local Government:
Asymmetric Intra-Local Fiscal Effects.” Public Budgeting & Finance 24 (4): 111–47.
 Resnick, Phyllis. 2004. “Fiscal Cap Style TELs in the States: An Inventory and Evaluation”. CPEC Center for
Tax Policy.
 Warner, M. E., & Pratt, J. E. (2005). Spatial Diversity in Local Government Revenue Effort Under
Decentralization: A Neural-Network Approach. Environment and Planning.C, Government & Policy,
23(5), 657-678.
 Kioko, Sharon M. and Christine R. Martell. 2012. “Impact of State-Level Tax and Expenditure Limits (TELs)
on Government Revenues and Aid to Local Governments”. Public Finance Review 40 (6), 736-766.
 Shadbegian, Ronald J. 1998. “Do Tax and Expenditure Limitations Affect Local Government Budgets?
Evidence from Panel Data.” Public Finance Review 26 (2): 118–36.

Abstract Index #: 669
LESSONS ABOUT  land_use REGIONALISM FROM TWO RUST BELT METROPOLITAN area
Abstract System ID#: 951
Individual Paper
SKUZINSKI, Thomas [University of Michigan] skuzinsk@umich.edu
What role does the metropolitan institutional context—including both rules and norms—play in explaining the
attitudes of local elected officials and staff planners toward intermunicipal cooperation? Studies of
intermunicipal cooperation, a key form of regional governance, often incorporate the metropolitan institutional
context but without examining its theoretical micro-foundations. This study uses original 2013-2014 survey data
from nearly 600 local officials in over 250 municipalities in two major Rust Belt metropolitan area in Michigan—
Detroit and Grand Rapids—to explore the linkages between institutional setting and attitudes about
intermunicipal cooperation in the form of joint  land_use planning. The tensions between regional and local
interests tend to be especially high in Rust Belt metropolitan area, which exhibit high levels of regional
jurisdictional fragmentation, a strong home rule tradition, fiscal strain, and persistent socioeconomic cleavages.
Hierarchical linear modeling suggests a limited and insignificant role for metropolitan level regional councils and
sub-metropolitan voluntary associations, and for past and current cooperation in other policy area. Case studies
suggest a potentially critical but unrealized role for public entrepreneurs and third-party intervention. While the
findings can be reconciled with the existing theoretical characterization of intermunicipal cooperation as a
transaction among firm-like local governments, they also demonstrate some of the limitations of this perspective.
The study also highlights the practical difficulties of relying on state-level enabling legislation that allows purely
voluntary intermunicipal cooperation without accompanying incentives or mandates.
References
 Carr, Jered B., Kelly LeRoux, and Manoj Shrestha. "Institutional ties, transaction costs, and external
service production." Urban Affairs Review 44.3 (2009): 403-427.
 Thurmaier, Kurt, and Curtis Wood. "Interlocal agreements as overlapping social networks: Picket–fence
regionalism in metropolitan Kansas City." Public Administration Review 62.5 (2002): 585-598.
 Feiock, Richard C., Annette Steinacker, and Hyung Jun Park. "Institutional collective action and economic
development joint ventures." Public Administration Review 69.2 (2009): 256-270.





Gerber, Elisabeth R., and Clark C. Gibson. "Balancing regionalism and localism: How institutions and
incentives shape American transportation policy." American Journal of Political Science 53.3 (2009): 633648.
Ansell, Chris. "The networked polity: Regional development in Western Europe." Governance 13.2
(2000): 279-291.

Abstract Index #: 670
ESTIMATING THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF PORT GROWTH EMPLOYING GPS DATA, FREIGHT MODELING, AND
ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS AT THE LOCAL AND MEGAREGION LEVELS
Abstract System ID#: 993
Individual Paper
BOSTON, Thomas [Georgia Institute of Technology] thomas.boston@inta.gatech.edu
WANG, Fangru [Georgia Institute of Technology] fangru@gatech.edu, presenting author
ROSS, Catherine [Georgia Institute of Technology] catherine.ross@coa.gatech.edu, primary author
LEE, David Jung-Hwi [Georgia Institute of Technology] david.lee@coa.gatech.edu
As a new geography, megaregions are increasingly discussed at both academic and policy arenas, as more
population and economic activities are concentrated in such large scaled regions (Ross, 2012). The importance of
megaregions is increasing with its large numbers of population and economic agglomerations, and corresponding
impacts on the economy, environment, and society (Ross & Woo, 2011). Although there have been a number of
studies that examined the phenomena of emerging megaregions and their policy implications, further analysis
and research on megaregions calls for data that do not represent traditional geographical boundaries, and for
innovative methodologies that are scalable and provide relevant policy information at the micro and macro
levels.
The Panama Canal is undergoing an expansion that will double its capacity by allowing larger sizes of ships to
traverse the canal. The expansion is expected to be completed in 2016 and will likely cause a substantial increase
in commodities transported from Asia to the eastern United States. The growing flows of commodities and truck
traffic, which have been a fundamental component of contemporary changes in economic system (Cidell, 2010;
Hesse & Rodrigue, 2004), will then bring about significant impact at both the local and regional scales. It is thus
critical to understand the possible magnitude of the  impact under different scenarios of the growing freight
movements due to the expansion.
This paper proposes a megaregion-level methodological framework to estimate the impact of canal expansion on
transportation infrastructure and economic growth in Georgia counties located in the Piedmont Atlantic
Megaregion (PAM). Truck activity is tracked through GPS data linked to specific commodity flows by specific
NAICS codes to estimate county-level economic impact in Georgia. Multiple sources of data were employed,
including Global Positioning System (GPS) truck data, Freight Analysis Framework (FAF) data, commodity flow
survey data, and IMPLAN data, to identify: (1) the port-associated truck movements; (2) the increase in
commodity flows and truck movement; (3) the freight and commodity distribution at the county level; and (4) the
county-level economic impact including new locations for freight traffic, employment, revenue, high-growth
sectors, economic output, and value added under different scenarios due to the canal expansion. Linking freight
modeling with commodity flow and economic impact analysis, this methodology not only allows us to discover
the freight flows at regional and megaregional level, but also provides detailed information of local economic
activities demonstrating the use of megaregion-level analysis at the local level.
References
 Cidell, J. (2010). Concentration and decentralization: The new geography of freight distribution in US
metropolitan area. Journal of transportation Geography, 18(3), 363–371.
doi:10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2009.06.017
 Hesse, M., & Rodrigue, J.-P. (2004). The transportation geography of logistics and freight distribution. Journal
of transportation Geography, 12(3), 171–184. doi:10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2003.12.004




Ross, C. (2012). Megaregions: Planning for Global Competitiveness. Island Press.
Ross, C., & Woo, M. (2011). Megaregions and Mobility. National Academy of Engineering. Retrieved
from https://www.nae.edu/Publications/Bridge/43180/43293.aspx

Abstract Index #: 671
METROPOLITAN GROWTH policy AND SOCIOECONOMIC DISPARITY IN U.S. METROPOLITAN area (19802010)
Abstract System ID#: 1016
Individual Paper
LEE, Sugie [Hanyang University] sugie-lee@hanmail.net
Widening socioeconomic disparities and spatial differentiations within metropolitan area are important policy
issues for urban planners and policy makers. Many urban scholars have an interest in the balanced growth
between city and suburbs in the metropolitan area (Orfield, 1997; Rusk, 2003). Smart growth policy, including
urban containment, intend to redirect potential development into existing comminuty. Such policy may have
a positive impact to relieve socioeconomic disparity within the metropolitan area (Lee, 2011). Some studies
indicated that urban containment policy have positive associations with central city revitalization (Dawkins et
al., 2003; Nelson et al., 2004). However, the relationship between metropolitan growth policy and
socioeconomic disparity in the context of intra-metropolitan spatial differentiation has not been fully examined in
the planning literature. This study focuses on the impact of metropolitan growth policy on the intrametropolitan spatial differentiations and socioeconomic disparities in terms of race, income and poverty. The
primary data source is the longitudinal data from the Geolytics Neighborhood Change Database (NCDB) that
includes U.S. Census 1980, 1990, 2000, and 2010. This study also uses American Community Survey (ACS). For the
364 core-based metropolitan statistical area (CBSAs), this study categorized metropolitan growth policy using a
catalog of urban containment policy and statewide smart growth policy (Wassmer, 2006). Using the
longitudinal U.S. Census database from 1980 to 2010, this study conducts spatial panel regression analysis. The
expected results include that intra-metropolitan spatial differentiations and socioeconomic disparity have been
gradually increased over time, but they are less strong in the metropolitan area with smart growth policy.
These findings should point to the potential positive impact of smart growth policy to achieve balanced growth
within U.S. metropolitan area.
References
 Dawkins, C. & Nelson, A.C. 2003. State growth management program and central-city revitalization.
Journal of the American Planning Association, 69(4), 381-96.
 Lee, S. 2011. Metropolitan growth patterns and socio-economic disparity in six US metropolitan area
1970–2000. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 35(5), 988-1011.
 Nelson, A. C., Burby, R. J., Feser, E., Dawkins, C. J., Malizia, E. E., & Quercia, R. 2004. Urban containment
and central-city revitalization. Journal of the American Planning Association, 70(4), 411-425.
 Orfield, M. 1997. Metropolitics: A regional agenda for community stability. Washington, DC: The
Brookings Institution.
 Wassmer, R. W. 2006. The influence of local urban containment policy and statewide growth
management on the size of United States urban area. Journal of Regional Science, 46(1), 25-65

Abstract Index #: 672
REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION PLANS UNDER CALIFORNIA’S SENATE BILL 375: ARE WE MOVING TOWARD
SUSTAINABILITY?
Abstract System ID#: 1059
Individual Paper
BARBOUR, Elisa [University of California, Berkeley] ebarbour@berkeley.edu

This paper evaluates the most recent Regional Transportation Plans (RTPs) of California’s four largest
Metropolitan Planning Organizations (MPOs), developed under provisions of the state’s new smart growth
regional planning law (Senate Bill 375, adopted in 2008). SB 375 requires that RTPs meet state-mandated targets
for reducing greenhouse gas emissions through more efficient  land_use and transportation patterns. These four
MPOs are a useful sample for comparative study of SB 375 implementation, because although distinct in many
ways, they have been treated by state agencies as a peer group in SB 375 planning, and they have long histories
of bottom-up sustainability planning in their own right. These factors mean that a study of their pre- and post-SB
375 plans can indicate how and whether the law has altered the MPOs’ planning behavior in response to their
varying circumstances.
The research, conducted for the California Energy Commission and my dissertation, evaluates whether the RTPs
advance sustainability goals, considered along two dimensions: 1) decision-making process, and 2) plan outputs,
or, in other words, the projects, program, and policy adopted for funding and implementation. The paper first
posits a set of criteria for evaluating whether and how RTPs advance sustainability goals and objectives, based on
concepts and benchmarks contained in the literatures on sustainability governance and impact assessment (e.g.
Meadowcroft, 2007) and sustainable transport, including sustainability performance metrics for transportation (e.g.
Santos et al., 2010; and Zietsman et al., 2011). Then, based on evaluation of the written record of adopted plan
documents by the four MPOs, the paper considers and compares the plan processes and outputs across distinct
stages (or planning elements), including initial goal-setting, public participation and stakeholder engagement,
performance measurement, evaluation of policy and program options (scenario modeling and project evaluation
techniques), performance aspects of adopted final plans, implementation methods, and monitoring of progress.
The paper presents both quantitative and qualitative findings. My quantitative methods include categorizing and
comparing plan performance metrics selected by the MPOs, and applying Multicriteria Decisionmaking (MCDM)
techniques to evaluate which modeled performance gains were maximized in their adopted plan scenarios (see
e.g. Jeon et al., 2010, for an application of MCDM). My qualitative assessment includes evaluating institutional
innovations adopted by the MPOs to improve plan performance, such as performance-based rewards system for
transit agencies and local governments that adopt policy measures conducive to plan goals. I focus especially on
evaluating institutional innovations aimed at strengthening planning and policy connections between
transportation and  land_use, because that is a major goal of SB 375, but also a challenging one due to the
institutional governance disjuncture between authority over regional transportation funding and planning (which
rests with MPOs) and authority over  land_use (which rests with local governments). My results will be of interest
to scholars of sustainable transportation and regional planning who seek to understand how to develop
systematic methods for evaluating whether RTPs advance sustainability goals and objectives.
References
 Jeon, C. M., Amekudzi, A. A., & Guensler, R. L. (2010). Evaluating plan alternatives for transportation
system sustainability: Atlanta metropolitan region. International Journal of Sustainable Transportation,
4(4), 227-247.
 Meadowcroft, J. (2007). Who is in charge here? Governance for sustainable development in a complex
world. Journal of environment Policy & Planning, 8(3-4): 299-314.
 Santos, G., H. Behrendt, and A. Teytelboym. (2010). Part II: Policy instruments for sustainable road
transport. Research in Transportation Economics 28, no. 1: 46-91.
 Zietsman, J. (2011). A guidebook for sustainability performance measurement for transportation
agencies (Vol. 708). Transportation Research Board.

Abstract Index #: 673
YOUTH CLIMATE ACTIVISM: FROM SOCIAL MOVEMENT TO PLANNING INTERVENTION
Abstract System ID#: 1097
Individual Paper
LAKANEN, Raili [University of Toronto] raili.lakanen@mail.utoronto.ca

The planning profession encourages participation from multiple stakeholders, including – and sometimes,
especially – young adults. Yet mixed messages about the role of young adults in politics and policy development
abound in mainstream media. On the one hand, youth are portrayed as future leaders and passionate, creative
thinkers; on the other, they are regarded as lazy, apathetic, and disengaged from traditional civic life.
This paper asserts that young people are making meaningful interventions into regional planning and national
politics through social movements, particularly with respect to climate change policy. In Canada, the youth
climate movement is notable for its criticism of the federal government’s promotion of natural resource
extraction in a context of weakened environment regulation. Since 2006, the Conservative government under
Prime Minister Stephen Harper has been hostile to environment interests, attempting to dismiss and disparage
those questioning the government’s environment, energy, and resource policy. This is a time of increased
setbacks for activists, muzzling of environment scientists, fewer “wins” for environment groups, and mounting
contentious politics around climate and energy issues. Why are some youth opting to participate in public debate
now, when the costs of participation and risk to reputation appear higher than ever? Given the long-term
orientation of the issues involved, how might regional planning frameworks align with the goals of the youth
climate movement?
In addition to a document and media analysis, the paper is informed by semi-structured, in-depth interviews with
youth climate activists across Canada, and is part of an ongoing dissertation project. For this project, youth are
defined as those who are/were between 18 and 30 years of age during the 2006-2015 era. The dissertation
research focuses more broadly on understanding how young individuals navigate and alter the climate
movement while carving and developing their own “brand” of activism, and identifying which factors (e.g.
experience, exposure and education) may influence activists’ understanding of the environment.
As such, the research engages with questions of participation, politics, and representation in the youth climate
movement in Canada. Through the in-depth focus on the Canadian case study, the research will provide new
insight into the way that this social movement politicizes young participants and (re)generates streams of
environmental politics to encourage particular actions and repertoires of participation in the public realm. In
particular, this paper will begin to identify links between social movement theory and progressive planning, by
considering how the Canadian youth climate movement incorporates critical sustainability, environment justice,
and right to the city approaches. It will also identify the non-traditional ways in which youth may influence the
planning process. After briefly discussing youth activists’ motivations and mobilizations, regional planning
opportunities in key jurisdictions in Canada will be identified as sites of potential intervention – how the climate
movement may be able to influence planning and policy “on the ground”. Preliminary investigation suggests that
the local may be the scale at which policy related to transnational climate change can be most effectively
implemented in the Canadian context.
References
 Tilly, C. & Tarrow, S. (2007). Contentious Politics. London: Paradigm Publishers
 Kennelly, J. (2011). Citizen Youth: Culture, Activism, and Agency in a Neoliberal Era. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
 Brenner, N., Marcuse, P. & Mayer, M. (2012). city for people, not for profit: critical urban theory and
the right to the city. London: Routledge.
 Gurstein, P., Lovato, C. & Ross, S. (2003). Youth Participation in Planning: Strategies for Social Action.
Canadian Journal of Urban Research, 12(2), 249-274.

Abstract Index #: 674
A NEW APPROACH FOR THE EVALUATION OF WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION GOVERNANCE NETWORK
EFFECTIVENESS: FINDINGS FROM THE STUDY OF THE WSS GOVERNANCE NETWORK OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF
TELA HONDURAS
Abstract System ID#: 1309
Individual Paper

ALVARADO, Rigoberto Edgardo [McGill University] realvara@yahoo.com
Water and sanitation service is commonly provided to rural and peri-urban area of developing countries through
partnerships and networks that involve international agencies. However, despite funneling large sums of
international and national aid, these types of organizations are rarely evaluated; evaluation methods for
networks remain complex and unclear. This paper, based on my doctoral research, outlines a new framework for
assessment of network governance and applies it to the case of water and sanitation provision in Tela, Honduras.
This paper builds on network governance theory to propose a new framework for the assessment of the
effectiveness of Water and Sanitation Sector (WSS) governance networks in developing countries and applies it
through field research in Honduras. The framework is premised on the theoretical perspective that, rather than
applying different criteria for each of the network stakeholders, it is better to relate the overall performance of
networks to the different phases of the policy process.
The proposed two-phase analytical method first identifies the WSS governance network, and then makes an
approximation of effectiveness through a four-stage policy analysis framework. Effectiveness is evaluated with
respect to both governance processes and network outputs. Performance indicators to assess the WSS
governance network were specified for each of the four stages of the policy process. Twenty-three (23) indicators
cover a wide range of important water issues, such as quality and availability, and also important network
aspects, such as coordination capacity, conflict resolution capacity, and organizational culture. Data used include
the aggregated contributions of different strategic members of the network as well as information on functions
specific to the network as a whole (such as coordination or meta-governance functions); these data were
compiled based on published policy documents, internal (grey) literature and interviews with key members of
each organization/entity active in the network.
A finding from the research is that the water and sanitation network of the Municipality of Tela is composed of
four stakeholders strictly working at the community level and four others operating at higher levels of
governance. The network actively working on the long term sustainability of the water sanitation system, the
strengthening of local institutions, and fully engaged in regulating and strengthening of water boards.
In terms of the proposed methods, the research suggests that the proposed new analytical framework for the
assessment of the effectiveness of WSS governance networks is a simple and useful tool that can inform decisionmaking. It is likely to be of use for those striving to improve water and sanitation provision through network
forms of organization, particularly for the benefit of comminuty or society at large.
The research will be of interest to planners and researchers concerned with evaluation of complex decisionmaking and governance processes. It will also be of interest to those concerned with barriers to and
opportunities for more equitable and efficient delivery of basic services to secondary city of the developing
world. The research advances governance network evaluation methodology. The proposed PAF assessment
methodology, with its related set of customized indicators, generates important information about a littlestudied but increasingly common form of service delivery. It opens up many area for future practice and
research; other governance networks can be evaluated by modifying the indicators designed for WSS in Tela or,
alternatively, the WSS network can be evaluated from other perspectives, such as efficiency and gender
participation.
References
 Meyer, M. W. (2002). Rethinking Performance Measurement: Cambridge University Press.
 Sorensen, E., & Torfing, J. (2007). Theories of Democratic Network Governance: Palgrave Macmillan.
 Turrini, A., Cristofoli, D., Frosini, F., & Nasi, G. (2010). Network Literatute About Determinants of
Network Effectiveness. Public Administration, 88(2), 528-550.

Abstract Index #: 675
PLANNING FOR SUSTAINABILITY IN THE LOS ANGELES REGION: INSIGHTS FROM THE REGIONAL PLAN

Abstract System ID#: 1286
Individual Paper
TSAI, Oscar [University of California, Irvine] otsai@uci.edu
The purpose of this research is to examine the regional planning process and plan that will influence future
sustainable development in Southern California. In 2008, California adopted first legislation in the nation to link
climate change with  land_use and transportation planning. Commonly called Senate Bill 375 (SB 375), the
Sustainable comminuty and Climate Protection Act required metropolitan planning organizations (MPOs) in the
state to implement a collaborative process to prepare a Sustainable comminuty Strategy (SCS) as a new
element in their long-range Regional Transportation Plans (RTPs). Building upon existing local and regional efforts
that encourage smart growth, the SCS integrates regional  land_use and transportation planning and offers
regulatory incentives for new development consistent with the strategy. It is the intent of these new RTP/SCS
plans to encourage compact and transit-oriented development to help the state achieve its climate policy and
GHG reduction goals.
Although the metropolitan scale is the most appropriate for addressing sustainability, challenges such as
inadequate regional governance and a lack of regionally-oriented inter-local cooperation continue to hinder
regional approaches to sustainable development (Wheeler, 2000). This is particularly true for the Los Angeles
region, which is characterized by fragmentation, strong local autonomy, and enormous diversity, in addition to
being overseen by a metropolitan planning organization that lacks  land_use authority. In this context, cooperative
approaches to planning are necessary to solve problems that cross jurisdictions (Healey, 2006). With smart
growth policy encouraging cooperative regional approaches to sustainable development, it remains to be seen
if new and effective forms of regional governance can be achieved in California (Barbour & Deakin, 2012).
Additionally, scholars have argued that without a clear definition of sustainability, planners have often utilized
the concept to preserve economic development, neglect the natural environment, and ignore social inequalities
(Gunder, 2006). Indeed, sustainable development plans often place a greater emphasis on vague concepts of
improving quality of life, rather than explicitly advancing equity or the conservation of natural resources (Berke &
Conroy, 2003). With these issues in mind, this research examined the RTP/SCS planning process and plan for the
Los Angeles region to determine the extent to which cooperative planning by diverse stakeholders advanced
principles of sustainable development in the adopted plan.
Unanimously adopted in 2012 by the Southern California Association of Governments, the largest MPO in the
nation, the RTP/SCS for the Los Angeles region represents the first major step towards a regional approach to
sustainable planning in Southern California. Using indicators for strong sustainable development plans identified
by scholars, as well as sustainable development principles identified by the United States Green Building Council,
this research used content analysis to evaluate the extent to which principles of sustainable development were
compromised or enhanced in the RTP/SCS. Additionally, the analysis of interviews revealed how environment
and transportation groups were able to coordinate effectively to promote a unified agenda for sustainability in
the region.
In an area that faces a variety of environment, equity, and governance challenges, as well as the need to
accommodate an additional five million inhabitants by 2035, the RTP/SCS is poised to shape the future of the
region in a major way. This research examines a piece of California’s unprecedented effort to address climate
change through the promotion of smart growth planning at the metropolitan scale and provides planning
practitioners and scholars with insights into a regional approach to sustainable development.
References
 Barbour, E. & Deakin, E. (2012). Smart growth planning for climate change: Evaluating California’s Senate
Bill 375, Journal of the American Planning Association, 78(1), 70-86.
 Berke, P., & Conroy, M. (2000). Are we planning for sustainable development? An evaluation of 30
comprehensive plans. Journal of the American Planning Association, 66(1), 21-33.
 Gunder, M. (2006). Sustainability: Planning’s saving grace or road to perdition? Journal of Planning
Education and Research, 26, 208-221.




Healey, P. (2006). Collaborative planning: Shaping places in fragmented societies (2nd ed.). Basingstoke,
UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Wheeler, S. (2000). Planning for metropolitan sustainability. Journal of Planning Education and Research,
20, 133-145.

Abstract Index #: 676
MILLENIALS, YOUNG ADULTS, CITY AND SUBURBAN EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT CHANGE AND INCOME
INEQUALITY
Abstract System ID#: 1342
Individual Paper
ANDREASON, Stuart [Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta] stuart.andreason@atl.frb.org
Cities across the country have undergone significant revitalization over the last twenty five years. Incomes in
central city have increased relative to the suburbs and older housing stock in central city has become
desirable (Lucy and Phillips 2006). Since the 1990s many American downtowns have gone under significant
change, becoming popular destinations for young, educated, and creative workers – potentially driving economic
revitalization in these area (Birch 2005; Florida 2009). In fact Millenials state that they will choose a city to live
in (typically an amenity rich vibrant city) and then find a job that fits that lifestyle (Cortright 2005).
While the apparent changing preferences of Millenials has led many policymakers to place significant optimism in
the role that the generation will play in long term urban economic growth, the age cohort also faces significant
economic challenges. Underemployment and unemployment have been felt acutely by Millenials (Shierholz et. al
2014). Many Millenials are pessimistic on their prospects in the economy face significant amounts of debt and
have difficulty finding work that is commensurate with their education (Kaplan et. al 2014).
This begs a significant question – if Millenials are driving economic revitalization in some city, but having
challenges in the labor market, how does growth in young adults affect economic improvement in city equally?
This paper presents two models, one regression model that shows that growth in young adults is related to
increases in educational attainment (and that these gains are concentrated in the central city relative to its
suburbs) and a second cluster-discriminant analysis that suggests that growth in young adults has different
effects on labor market outcomes depending on the demand and demographic characteristics of the labor
market. Smaller, and lower gross metro product (GMP) labor markets tend to see stagnant wages but lower
income inequality, while larger and higher GMP labor markets see economic growth but higher relative income
inequality, worsening unemployment, and poverty.
References
 Cortright, Joseph. 2005. The Young and the Restless in a Knowledge Economy. Chicago, IL: CEOs for
Cities.
 Florida, Richard. 2009. Who’s Your City? How the Creative Economy Is Making Where to Live the Most
Important Decision of Your Life. Reprint. Basic Books.
 Kaplan, Heidi, Alexandra Brown, Nuha Elmaghrabi, and Lindsey Holthaus. 2014. In The Shadow of the
Great Recession: Experiences and Perspectives of Young Workers. Washington, DC: Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System.
 Lucy, William H., and David L. Phillips. 2006. Tomorrow’s city, Tomorrow's Suburbs. American Planning
Association.
 Shierholz, Heidi, Alyssa Davis, and Will Kimball. 2014. Class of 2014: The Weak Economy Is Idling Too
Many Young Graduates. Briefing Paper #377. Washington DC: Economic Policy Institute.

Abstract Index #: 677
STATUS OF CLIMATE ADAPTATION EFFORTS IN THE COAST OF NEW ENGLAND: PRELIMINARY RESULT OF 100+
WEB-SURVEYS WITH PLANNERS

Abstract System ID#: 1347
Individual Paper
EMLINGER, Ana [University of Massachusetts, Amherst] amesquit@larp.umass.edu
Adaptation to climate change, defined by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in (Summary for
policymakers), is the process of adjustment to actual or expected climate and its effects. In human system,
adaptation seeks to moderate or avoid harm or exploit beneficial opportunities. In some natural system, human
intervention may facilitate adjustment to expected climate and its effects (IPCC WGII AR5, 2014, p.5).
A systematic incorporation of climate change concerns into formal community planning, management, and
infrastructure design is in nascent stage. The challenges of effective adaptation are extremely complex and likely
to be politically difficult both at the local and higher levels of government, but it is at the local level where the
impact of climate change is most likely to be felt and dealt with. The police and fire departments in these
communities are the first responders in a crisis, and it is municipally determined urban form and transportation
networks that will prevent the worst  impact of climate change (Schechtman & Brady 2013). The causes of
climate change are global, but the  impact are experienced locally (IPCC 2014).
Although a number of studies of local government action have indicated that action at higher levels of
government have significant impact on local capacity to manage climate change adaptation, Rosenzweig
highlights that perhaps a necessary component of successful implementation of regional sustainability efforts is
strong leadership from local planning offices. Initiative shown by planners, with the support of local officials, is
often a prerequisite for action, especially when the issues are controversial (Rosenzweig, et al., 2011).
Efforts are needed to guide proactive adaptation actions that benefit coastal comminuty for present and future
generations. In the real world, however, planners are alone in their innumerable daily struggles and issues related
to climate change are frequently placed in the bottom of their list of priorities.
Frenchman (2000) argues that from the point of view of a practitioner who reviews hundreds of requests for
planning services each year, the profession of planning is not only alive but also increasingly important to shaping
urban growth and development. Planners in the United States have never had it easy (Innes, 1998). The challenge
for planners, continues Innes, has grown in recent years as organized interests have increasingly become active
players in planning decisions and as public trust in government has declined.
Coastal comminuty across the New England region and the country are facing challenges from climate change
including more extreme storms, hotter and longer-lasting heat waves, more rain in winter and less in summer, as
well as the slower but significant effects of sea level rise. To identify planners’ perspectives on the status of
climate change adaptation at the local level, I am doing a research that was designed by verifying a lacunae in the
literature related to this aspect of the planning profession. The data collection started with 15 in-person
interviews with planners along the coast of Massachusetts conducted in 2011; it continued in 2014 with the
conduction of 36 in-person interviews with planners still along the coast of Massachusetts in 2014 and was
concluded in 2015 with the application of 100+ web-surveys with planners in small and medium coastal
communities of New England (states of Connecticut, Rhode Island, Maine, New Hampshire and Massachusetts).
The preliminary findings of this 3rd phase of the project (web-surveys) completed in 2015 is the subject that I
would like to present at the ACSP 2015 Conference.
References
 Frenchman, D. (2000) “Where are the planners?” ch. 24 in Rodwin, L. and Sanyal, B. (eds) The Profession
of City Planning, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, pp.217-219.
 Innes, J. (1998) “Challenge and Creativity in Post-Modern Planning” ch. 24 in Rodwin, L. and Sanyal, B.
(eds) The Profession of City Planning, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, pp.31-35.
 IPCC (2014). Climate Change 2014:  impact, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Summary For Policymakers
WgII Ar5 Phase I Report Launch 2/ 31 March 2014 - Approved SPM – Copyedit Pending.




Rosenzweig, C., W. Solecki, et al. (2011). Climate Change and city: First Assessment Report of the
Urban Climate Change Research Network. Cambridge.
Schechtman, J., & Brady, M. (2013). Cost-efficient climate change adaptation in the North Atlantic.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), United States of America - gov; Sea Grant,
NOAA.

Abstract Index #: 678
CROSSROADS FOR U.S. REGIONAL transportation PLANNING: THE 1962 HIGHWAY ACT
Abstract System ID#: 1377
Individual Paper
SCIARA, GianClaudia [University of California, Davis] sciara@ucdavis.edu
The 50th anniversary of the 1962 Highway Act passed with little notice from planning scholars, yet the passage of
this legislation marked a pivotal turning point for transportation planning practice in U.S. urban regions. A key
federal transportation initiative, the 1962 Act established the foundation for regional scale transportation
planning in the U.S. Further, it set the stage in the latter half of the twentieth century for the institutional
evolution of regional planning and processes; it “signaled…the devolution of transportation decision-making from
state and federal highway engineers to local metropolitan planning agencies” (Mohl 2008, 195) and it paved the
way for urban transportation planning to address a widening set of social and environment concerns. This
evolution continues today, as metropolitan planning practice continues to adapt to changing circumstances and
21st century concerns.
In the first half of the 20th century, the structure of federal transportation investment decision-making had
privileged rurally-focused state highway departments as the key participant, had located spending control with
those departments, and had defined potential outcomes of federal investment and its informational inputs to
favor highway construction. The early 1960s marked a turning point. Motivated by longstanding calls for more
regionally-scaled urban-focused entities to address metropolitan transportation, by disappointment with uneven
efforts to create them, and by recent experiences with destructive state-led highway building in urban area, the
1962 Highway Act was an important first step in structuring transportation planning and decisionmaking to
consider metropolitan interests.
The 3-c policy included in the 1962 Highway Act and the regulations issued in its wake broke new ground. They
made federal transportation expenditure in urban area contingent upon a transportation planning process that
involved the state and local comminuty and that was continuing, cooperative and comprehensive in character.
The law sought to broaden participation in decision-making and to shift some control from away from state
highway departments to urban officials. Specifically, Section 134 of the Act stated that the federal government
would:
"not approve...any program for projects in any urban area of more than fifty thousand population unless…such
projects are based on a continuing comprehensive transportation planning process carried on cooperatively by
States and local comminuty."
Further, the law further declared it was
"…in the national interest to encourage and promote the development of transportation system, embracing
various modes of transportation in a manner that will serve the States and local comminuty efficiently and
effectively."
Only 160-words, Section 134 presented broad ideals and values for guiding federal investments in metropolitan
transportation. Yet, the brief paragraph was short on executive detail and provided no operating guide for
realizing the 3-c vision.

This paper considers how, over time, subsequent federal policy and regulation has elaborated the 3-c vision.
Using the lens of institutional analysis and development theory, it explores how federal policy and rules over time
have specified key components of the regional transportation decisionmaking arena, including include the
participants involved and information used in regional transportation planning, as well as the potential outcomes
of metropolitan transportation planning and the allocation of control over those outcomes (Ostrom 2005).
Tracing the evolution of these components, this paper concludes that, the 1962 created a platform for urban
regions to play, over time, a far larger role in transportation decisionmaking than the original law had ever
suggested. It also finds the 3-c process has proven to be a versatile framework through which new planning
concerns, information, and outcomes could be considered over the years, and new stakeholders included as
participants.
References
 Ostrom, E. (2005). Understanding Institutional Diversity. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
 Mohl, R. A. (2008). The Interstates and the city: The U.S. Department of Transportation and the
Freeway Revolt, 1966–1973. Journal of Policy History, 20(2), 193-226.
 Solof, M. (1996-1997). The History of MPOs NJTPA Quarterly. Newark, NJ: North Jersey Transportation
Planning Authority.
 Goldman, T., & Deakin, E. (2000). Regionalism through Partnerships? Metropolitan Planning Since ISTEA.
Berkeley Planning Journal, 14, 46-75.

Abstract Index #: 679
THE IMPACT OF SUSTAINABLE BUILDING PROJECTS ON REGIONAL GREEN ECONOMIES
Abstract System ID#: 1384
Individual Paper
LEE, Eun [Cleveland State University] e.lee16@csuohio.edu
As the sustainable building movement has attracted worldwide attention over the past decade, a growing
amount of literature has provided evidence of the relationship between the diffusion of sustainable buildings and
regional economies. Generally, these studies can be categorized into two groups, in terms of the direction of the
relationship. First, several studies show that regional economic vitality positively affects the diffusion of
sustainable buildings. By contrast, some initial work indicates that the proliferation of green-certified buildings
promotes local economic growth by facilitating sustainable construction-related industries.
Considering the geographical boundary of analysis, the first group of studies examines the impact of regional
economic conditions on the diffusion of green-certified buildings at the metro level. On the other hand, the
second group of studies mostly identifies the impact of green buildings on economic growth in a specific region.
In other words, these has been a lack of nationwide studies in the second group literature. In this context, the
purpose of this study is to examine the impact of green building construction on regional green economies at the
Metropolitan Statistical Area level in the United States.
This study hypothesizes a positive influence of green building construction on regional green industrial sectors in
terms of the number of firms and jobs. Specifically, two hypotheses are tested in this study. The first hypothesis
focuses on green industries only, while the second covers overall industries. By doing so, this study tests the
extent to which green construction  impact regional economies. If the diffusion of green buildings is significantly
associated with green economic growth, this may imply the possibility that green buildings can be used as an
indicator of regional green economic growth.
References
 Allen, J., & Potiowsky, T. (2008). Portland’s Green Building Cluster: Economic Trends and  impact.
Economic Development Quarterly, 22(4), 303-315.
 Fuerst, F., Kontokosta, C., McAllister, P. (2014). Determinants of green building adoption. Environment
and Planning B-Planning & Design, 41(3): 551-570.




Kok, N., McGraw, M., and Quigley, J. (2011). The Diffusion of Energy Efficiency in Building. American
Economic Review, 101(3): 77-82.
Maclaren, V. (1996). Urban sustainability reporting. Journal of the American Planning Association, 62,
184-202.

Track 14: Transportation and Infrastructure
Abstract Index #: 680
SOCIAL DISPARITIES IN WALKING TO SCHOOL: BUILT ENVIRONMENT AND NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTERISTICS
AROUND ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS IN WASHINGTON, D.C.
Abstract System ID#: 3
Poster
HWANG, Jinuk [Texas A&M University] j.hwang@tamu.edu, presenting author, primary author
JOH, Kenneth [Texas A & M University] kjoh@tamu.edu
WOO, Ayoung [Texas A&M University] awoo@arch.tamu.edu
A variety of research has revealed the advantages of walkable environments. For children, walkable
environments provide opportunities to walk to school, which promote regular physical activity and reduce
obesity risk. However, there are some controversies about the unequal distribution of these benefits in terms of
social equity. We investigated whether disadvantaged young children, such as low-income and minority
elementary school students, took advantage of the built and social environments that can encourage walking to
school. To reveal the social disparities in these environment supports for walking, this study examined various
factors, including the built environments and socio-demographic characteristics in neighborhood.
The case study focused on one of the most walkable city, Washington, D.C., (i.e., ranked 7th in the “most
walkable city” by Walk Score®, 2014). In this study, the unit of analysis was divided into three units. One unit was
77 elementary school attendance boundaries of D.C., and the others were 142 buffer zones of a quarter mile and
a half mile –commonly used as the distance that people are willing to walk– around the schools. By using the
buffer zones, this study examined more specific built environments and neighborhood characteristics
surrounding schools. To define the relationships between the proportion of the disadvantaged students in
schools and surrounding built environment conditions for walking, this study used both bivariate (correlation
and t-test) and multivariate (OLS regression model) analyses. Bivariate analysis examined the ethnic and
economic disparities in the benefits of built environments and neighborhood characteristics around the
elementary schools. Multivariate analysis more specifies the relationship between the disadvantaged children
and various factors that support walking.
This study selected various factors to determine built and social environments that promote walking. The
dependent variable was the proportion of disadvantaged students, specifically from minority and low-income
family, at each elementary school. Independent variables included various built environment factors such as the
Walk Score, population density, street connectivity, land-use diversity, street lights, sidewalks and the crime rate
of each unit. In addition, we involved the proportion of African American and median household income level as
control variables so as to identify the socio-demographic characteristics of neighborhood.
The results of bivariate analyses showed that there is a significant disparity in the environment support for
walking. Specifically, the schools that have a large proportion of disadvantaged children have lower Walk Score
and connectivity, and locate in school attendance zones with higher crime rate. Based on the analysis using both
a quarter- and a half-mile buffer zones, the result showed more significant disparity in terms of Walk Score and
sidewalks. However, after controlling neighborhood’s socio-demographic factors such as share of African
American rate and median household income, the result of multivariate analyses found a significantly positive

relationship between proportion of disadvantaged children and the Walk Score, while the sidewalk factor still
shows a negative relationship for the buffer zones.
Our results show that the surrounding neighborhood of elementary schools in D.C. have a favorable Walk Score,
but with poor sidewalk environments. Although the findings suggest that Washington D.C. has few amount of
disparity in Walk Score, there are still needs of careful attention to provide more desirable social and built
environments to support walking to school, such as safe neighborhood and extended sidewalks.
For the further supplement, the future research require an individual students’ data, instead of the aggregated
one. Because this study measured the reallocated social and built environment characteristics, further study
needs more detailed information of schools and children, such as children’s address.
References
 Joh, K., Nguyen, M. T., & Boarnet, M. G. (2012). Can built and social environment factors encourage
walking among individuals with negative walking attitudes? Journal of Planning Education and Research,
32(2), 219-236.
 Leslie, E., Coffee, N., Frank, L., Owen, N., Bauman, A., & Hugo, G. (2007). Walkability of local
communities: using geographic information system to objectively assess relevant environment
attributes. Health & place, 13(1), 111-122.
 Li, W., Joh, K., Lee, C., Kim, J.-H., Park, H., & Woo, A. (2014). From Car-Dependent neighborhood to
Walkers' Paradise: Estimating Walkability Premiums in Condominium Housing Market. Paper presented
at the Transportation Research Board 93rd Annual Meeting.
 Schlossberg, M., Greene, J., Phillips, P. P., Johnson, B., & Parker, B. (2006). School trips: effects of urban
form and distance on travel mode. Journal of the American Planning Association, 72(3), 337-346.
 Zhu, X., & Lee, C. (2008). Walkability and safety around elementary schools: economic and ethnic
disparities. American journal of preventive medicine, 34(4), 282-290.

Abstract Index #: 681
DOES BUS RAPID TRANSIT GENTRIFY neighborhood? EVIDENCE FROM LOS ANGELES
Abstract System ID#: 8
Individual Paper
BROWN, Anne [University of California, Los Angeles] aebrown0316@gmail.com
Bus Rapid Transit (BRT), mass transit that provides rail-like service on rubber tires, is gaining popularity in the US
as a lower-cost transit alternative to rail. However, despite BRT’s growing popularity and previous research that
finds links between rail investments, transit-oriented development (TOD) and gentrification, the effects of bus
investments remain unexplored. This study examines neighborhood change around the Los Angeles Orange Line,
the most heavily-ridden BRT line in the United States, between 2000 and 2012. Comparing half-mile station area
with two-mile surrounding control area, this study finds insufficient evidence to suggest that the Orange Line is
gentrifying adjacent neighborhood; a number of contextual factors may help to explain the limited changes.
However, given international BRT case studies, BRT’s potential to gentrify neighborhood cannot be ruled out in
the future or in other contexts. Therefore, city investing in BRT should ensure place-sensitive planning to
protect residents from displacement and ensure that accessibility and mobility benefits continue to be conferred
upon populations who benefit most from proximal transit.
References
 Freeman, L. (2005). Displacement or succession? Residential mobility in gentrifying neighborhood.
Urban Affairs Review, 40(4), pp. 463-491.
 Hook, W., Lotshaw, S., Weinstock, A. (2014). More Development for Your Transit Dollar: An Analysis of
21 American Transit Corridors. Institute for Transportation Development & Policy. Retrieved from:
https://go.itdp.org/download/attachments/40370541/more-development-for-your-transit-dollarITDP.pdf?version=1&modificationDate=1391015797164&api=v2






Chapple, K. (2009). Mapping susceptibility to gentrification: The early warning toolkit. University of
California at Berkeley Center for Community Innovation, August, 155-182.
Pollack, S., Bluestone, B., & Billingham, C. (2010). Maintaining diversity in America’s transit-rich
neighborhoods: Tools for equitable neighborhood change. Retrieved from
http://iris.lib.neu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1003&context=dukakis_pubs
Rodriguez, D. A., & Targa, F. (2004). Value of accessibility to Bogotá's bus rapid transit system. Transport
Reviews, 24(5), pp. 587-610.

Abstract Index #: 682
BIG DATA FOR INTRAMETROPOLITAN HUMAN MOVEMENT STUDIES
Abstract System ID#: 21
Individual Paper
ZHOU, Jiangping [Iowa State University] zhoujp@gmail.com
Human movements at the intrametropolitan level have been a topic of lasting interest to geographers, planners,
modelers and the like (Cervero 1998; Hanson and Giuliano 2004; Salas-Olmedo and Nogués 2012; Ortúzar and
Willumsen 2011). Data and information from traditional sources such as field trips, interviews, archives, surveys
and censuses dominate related studies. Only in recent years have passive user-generated big data such as smart
card data been introduced in those studies (Tao et al. 2014; Kim et al. 2014). Existing studies based on smart card
data have demonstrated that smart card data can be used to reveal the spatial-temporal dynamics of bus trips, to
identify subway trip between stations and to detect zones that share trip origins or destinations in proximity. It is
argued that smart card data could support evidence-based transit planning (Tao et al. 2014) and could facilitate
the simultaneous discovery of zones and subway passenger movements between these zones (Kim et al. 2014).
Unlike the data from traditional sources, however, there have not been standard ways to validate the quality and
reliability of information derived from big data. This article argues that the theory of urban formation can be used
to do the validation. In addition, the information derived from big data can be used to verify and even extend
existing theories or hypotheses of urban formation. It proposes a general framework regarding how the theory of
urban formation can be employed to validate information derived from smart card data and how the validated
information can supplement other data to reveal spatial patterns of economic agglomeration or human
settlements. Through a case study of Beijing, it demonstrates the usefulness of the framework. It also describes
the bus commuters’ subcenters’ characteristics of Beijing based on smart card data.

Abstract Index #: 683
CHARGING FOR PARKING TO FINANCE PUBLIC SERVICES
Abstract System ID#: 31
Individual Paper
SHOUP, Donald [University of California, Los Angeles] shoup@ucla.edu
Around the world, many low-income neighborhood in dense city have two serious problems: overcrowded onstreet parking and undersupplied public services. This article examines a policy to address both problems: charge
fair market prices for on-street parking and use the revenue to finance local public services. Our case study of a
pilot program for alley improvements in Beijing found that charging for parking can easily finance major public
investments. The estimated payback period for the investments in sanitation, security, landscaping, and parking
regulation is less than three years. Only 35 percent of the households in the pilot program own a car, and their
average annual income is almost three times the income of carless households. Charging for parking to finance
public services can therefore transfer income from richer drivers to poorer nondrivers. Similar results were found
for a neighborhood in New York City.
References
 Kim, Annette M. 2014. “Hidden City: Beijing’s Subterranean Housing Market,” Land Lines, October: 2−7.






Shoup, Donald. 2011. The High Cost of Free Parking, Chicago: Planners Press.
Shoup, Donald. 2014a. AInformal Parking Markets: Turning Problems into Solutions,@ in The Informal
American City, edited by Vinit Mukhija and Anastasia Loukaitou Sideris, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wang, Rui, and Quan Yuan. 2013. “Parking Practices and policy under Rapid Motorization: The Case of
China,”
Monkkonen, Paavo. 2012. “The Demand for Land Regularisation: Theory and Evidence from Tijuana,
Mexico,” Urban Studies, 49(2): 271–288.

Abstract Index #: 684
HIGH-SPEED RAIL AND LAND DEVELOPMENT IN CHINA
Abstract System ID#: 46
Individual Paper
ZHU, Pengyu [Boise State University] pengyuzhu@boisestate.edu
The construction of large-scale high-speed rail (HSR) network in China is altering the time-space relationships
between city. As a result, HSR is changing the traditional hierarchical urban system in China and regions with
large-scale networks of city are forming. At the city level, the construction of HSR new towns could contribute
to rapid  land_use development. In this paper, we focus on the relation between HSR and land development at the
city level and study how HSR is transforming city in China through the land development process. We conduct
empirical studies on all city within the HSR-impact area, which is defined as provinces that are covered by at
least one HSR line. Our sample will include city with a HSR station and those without. The empirical model we
apply will be a Difference-in-Difference model. Our first hypothesis to be tested is that HSR will facilitate the rapid
land development in city with HSR stations (i.e., through planned HSR new town surrounding the HSR station),
to an extent that is faster than city without HSR stations. Our second hypothesis is that, among city with HSR
stations, smaller city tend to experience faster land development compared with larger city. As evidenced in
my forthcoming paper (Zhu et. al. 2015), large city are able to carefully choose the locations of their HSR
stations and thus their planned HSR new towns are often within their existing central city. For medium to
smaller city, decentralization is often passively driven by HSR as the site selections of HSR stations are beyond
their control. The long distance between the HSR new town and the existing urban center often result in leapfrog
development.
This research helps to understand the relation between transportation infrastructure investment (i.e. HSR) and
 land_use development in the Chinese context. With high-speed rail networks currently being proposed and
designed to extend from Southeast China (the city of Kunming) to Southeast Asian countries such as Thailand,
Vietnam, Malaysia, and Singapore, this research project will have important policy implications for the
transportation planning and urban development in all countries of mainland Southeast Asia.

Abstract Index #: 685
UNINTENDED  impact OF BIKE-SHARING: CITI BIKE AND BUS RIDERSHIP IN NEW YORK CITY
Abstract System ID#: 48
Individual Paper
CAMPBELL, Kayleigh [Columbia University] krc2104@columbia.edu
With the increase of bike-sharing program in North America in recent years, there is a growing body of research
that looks at its  impact. While environment and health benefits are often used to justify these program,
transportation planners have also been interested in understanding the direct effects that this technology has on
the larger transportation network. Several studies have used survey methods to identify before-and-after
behavioral trends and find that bike-sharing program tend to have a minimal impact on car usage and may be
substituting for walking or public transit trips (Fishman, Washington, & Haworth, 2013; Shaheen, Cohen, &
Martin, 2013; Shaheen, Zhang, & Martin, 2011). Although informative, survey methods cannot fully capture the

causal effect of the implementation of bike-sharing technology (Krizek, Handy, & Forsyth, 2009). We aim to fill an
empirical gap in the literature by quantifying the effect that bike-sharing technology has on bus transit ridership
through the use of a differences-in-differences research design.
Because of the way the bike-sharing system was implemented in New York City, we can treat it like a natural
experiment. Citi Bike opened in parts of New York City in May 2013. It has bike stations in southern Manhattan,
but no stations north of 60th Street. We use the area that received Citi Bike stations as the treatment group and
the area that did not receive stations as the control group. The differences-in-differences regression allows us to
isolate the effects of the introduction of bike-sharing technology from other area and time effects. This controls
for differing neighborhood characteristics and for ridership trends. We find a significant decrease in bus ridership
during the study period in the full model and in a variety of specifications and subsets of the data.
This finding is particularly important as the nascent bike-share system plans to expand and for planners,
practitioners, and academics who need evidence-based research on the  impact of this growing technology.
Finally, finding that bike-sharing is a substitute for traditional public transportation is interesting in evaluating if
these system should be privately or publicly funded. It is our hope that this research encourages municipalities
to consider more integrated financing system that support the reality of multi-modal transportation needs (Sclar
& Lönnroth, 2014).
References
 Fishman, E., Washington, S., & Haworth, N. (2013). Bike Share: A Synthesis of the Literature. Transport
Reviews, 33(2), 148–165. doi:10.1080/01441647.2013.775612
 Krizek, K. J., Handy, S. L., & Forsyth, A. (2009). Explaining changes in walking and bicycling behavior:
challenges for transportation research. Environment and Planning B Abstract, 36(4), 725–740.
doi:10.1068/b34023
 Sclar, E. D., & Lönnroth, M. (2014). An introduction to the challenge of financing urban access. In E. D.
Sclar, M. Lönnroth, & C. Wolmar, Urban Access for the 21st Century: Finance and Governance Models
for transportation Infrastructure (pp. 1–10). New York: Routledge.
 Shaheen, S. A., Cohen, A. P., & Martin, E. W. (2013). Public Bikesharing in North America. Transportation
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2387, 83–92. doi:10.3141/2387-10
 Shaheen, S., Zhang, H., Martin, E., & Guzman, S. (2011). China's Hangzhou Public Bicycle. Transportation
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2247(-1), 33–41. doi:10.3141/2247-05

Abstract Index #: 686
INNOVATIVE APPROACHES TO TRANSPORTATION SERVICE PROVISION FOR AGING POPULATIONS RESIDING IN
AREAS LACKING FIXED-ROUTE PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SERVICE
Abstract System ID#: 55
Individual Paper
BOND, Megan [Florida State University] mab05@my.fsu.edu, presenting author, primary author
BROWN, Jeffrey [Florida State University] jrbrown3@fsu.edu
SUGURI, Vitor [Florida State University] vrs14@my.fsu.edu
WOOD, James [Florida State University] jpw14@my.fsu.edu
The availability of transportation options is particularly important to older Americans who for reasons of
disability, income, or choice are not able to drive themselves. While older Americans living in metropolitan area
that provide fixed-route transit have access to public transportation to help them meet their mobility needs,
nearly one out of five older adults live outside metropolitan area and lack easy access to such transportation
services. Many comminuty rely on paratransit services to help meet this critical transportation need; however,
such services have serious limitations related to the high cost associated with providing these services, the need
for users to schedule rides in advance of their actual travel, and service quality and reliability issues.

In several states, individuals and organizations have begun to experiment with innovative transportation services
that seek to address the limitations of the paratransit model in comminuty that lack fixed-route transit services.
These services range from publicly funded, quasi-formal service networks to volunteer-led organizations that rely
on private donations and informal operating approaches. Other informal approaches include volunteer-led
transportation linkages that operate using personal vehicles, on-call scheduling, and existing social networks to
provide rides to older adults who need one. However, these services are understudied. There is a need for more
information about the types of services that are provided, and there is a need for assessment about the
effectiveness of their organizational structures and service delivery strategies for providing critical mobility
services for the older population, the sustainability of their funding models, and the applicability of such
approaches for other comminuty.
Through the research we address the following three questions: (1) what types of innovative transportation
services exist in comminuty throughout the United States that are not served by traditional fixed-route transit
services?; (2) how are these innovative transportation services organized, financed, and delivered by the entities
that provide the services?; and (3) how are these innovative transportation services utilized by older Americans?
Due to the exploratory nature of the research, a grounded theory methodology is deemed most appropriate for
this primarily qualitative research as it is designed to yield themes and outcomes unique to the understudied
phenomenon of innovative transportation services. The project research design encompasses a series of specific
tasks, including a review of relevant literature to develop a typology of innovative service strategies, a case study
of six innovative strategies identified through the literature search, and key informant interviews with two key
informants associated with each of the cases. One interviewee is associated with the entity that either organizes
or operates the service, and the other interviewee is associated with the user community (or an organization
representing the users). The final result of the research is a set of best practices for planners and other interested
professionals in the United States.
References
 AARP. (2012, March 8). Meeting Older Adults’ Mobility Needs: Transportation Planning and Coordination
in Rural comminuty. Retrieved November 11, 2014, from
http://www.aarp.org/content/dam/aarp/livable-communities/learn/transportation/meeting-olderadults-mobility-needs-transportation-planning-and-coordination-in-rural-communities-2012-aarp.pdf
 KFH Group, Inc. (2008). TCRP Report 124: Guidebook for Measuring, Assessing, and Improving
Performance of Demand-Responsive Transportation. Transportation Research Board of the National
Academies. Washington, D.C.
 Safe Mobility for Life Coalition. (2011, September 2). Safe Mobility for Life Coalition Strategic Plan.
Retrieved November 8, 2014, from Safe Mobility for Life Coalition:
http://www.safeandmobileseniors.org/pdfs/FLAgingRoadUserStrategicSafetyPlan.pdf
 Thatcher, R., Procopio, T., Ferris, C., Davis, M., Morris, C., Rodman, W., et al. (2010). TCRP Report 142:
Vehicle Operator Recruitment, Retention, and Performance in ADA Complementary Paratransit
Operations. Transportation Research Board of the National Academies. Washington, D.C.
 Transportation for America & AARP, Inc. (2012). Aging in Place, Stuck without Options: Fixing the
Mobility Crisis Threatening the Baby Boom Generation. Washington, D.C.

Abstract Index #: 687
PUBLIC NEED VS. PRIVATE INTEREST: A CASE STUDY OF TRANSIT-ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT IN NORTH TEXAS
REGION
Abstract System ID#: 58
Individual Paper
MAGHELAL, Praveen [Masdar Institute] pmaghelal@masdar.ac.ae
Transit-oriented development (TOD) is proposed as a planning approach specifically targeting comminuty and
development around transit station to mitigate the impact of high private auto use and to encourage increased
use of non-motorized modes of travel. Major city across the United States have proposed strategies to develop

TODs for their station area (Litman, 2012). However, the key to the success of this planning approach is the
interaction of transit and the developments in the community adjoining that transit facility (station, stop, etc).
While provision of transit, its location and frequency of service is a function of public decision-making (TCRP,
2002), the developments in the community is a function of planning strategy adopted by public entities (transit
authority, urban planner) and motivation and interest of private developer who chose to develop the station
area. Therefore, this study investigates the differences in perception and action of both public and private
entities responsible for proposed and future developments in the station area.
In the North Texas Region, there are three transit agencies that serve four county area (Collin, Dallas, Denton,
and Tarrant), which include the Dallas Area Rapid Transit (DART), the Fort Worth Transportation Authority (The T)
and the Denton County Transportation Authority (DCTA). These agencies serve these comminuty through lightrail, bus system, Para-transit, High Occupancy Vehicle lanes and ride share services and provide a combined
ridership of about 115 million passenger trips in 2012 (DART, 2006).
We interviewed the public entities and private developers of ten transit stations in the North Texas region based
on four major themes: (1) Lifecycle of the station; (2) Characteristics; (3) Function it serves; and (4) Externalities
that affect their decision regarding the existing, proposed, and planned developments. The approach was
primarily based on grounded theory and done with narrative analysis techniques on the basis of the questions
asked in the semi-structured interviews. The themes were identified and explored through hermeneutic
interpretation of the findings. This relates to one aspect of Grounded Theory research in which there is a
constant comparison of the ideas involved in developing the theory as interpretation of the results are
continually refined (Padgett, 2004). Through this, we identify the difference in perception and approach by both
the stakeholders in developing the station area to be a true TOD. Content analysis of interviews were the coded
to identify the challenges and opportunities across the four themes and compared across the stakeholder.
While the developers, in most instances, were in-line with the perspective of public officials about the challenges
and opportunities at each station, some of their perspectives were either too visionary or driven purely by
market returns. Also, the developers wanted public entities to bridge the gap between them and the community
through public forums and charrettes that can make their development successful.
This study has implication for planning research and practice. While most TOD studies discuss the design and
planning aspect of the development, they have ignored the process and functions that lead to build a
“sustainable TOD”. This study introduces some of the challenges faced in envisioning a TOD by bringing the
perspective of the demand and supply side of the developments around the station area.
References
 2030 Transit System Plan. October 2006. Dallas Area Rapid Transit, Dallas TX
 Litman, T. 2012. Rail Transit in America: A Comprehensive Evaluation of Benefits. Victoria Transport
Policy Institute, Virginia.
 Padgett, Deborah K. (Ed.).2004. The Qualitative Research Experience. New York University: Thomson
Brooks Cole.
 Transit-Oriented Development and Joint Development in the United States: A Literature Review. 2002.
TCRP Report 52, Sponsored by the Federal Transit Administration, Transportation Research Board,
Washington DC

Abstract Index #: 688
THE POLITICS OF COLLECTIVE PUBLIC PARTICIPATION IN TRANSPORTATION DECISION-MAKING
Abstract System ID#: 73
Individual Paper
MCANDREWS, Carolyn [University of Colorado Denver] cmcandre@gmail.com
Citizen involvement in transportation planning is typically modeled on a liberal democracy in which individuals
express their preferences about a project. In this paper we present an analysis based on interviews with

stakeholders whose involvement was grounded in a complementary model of public participation, one in which
an organized community used collective action (instead of only individual expression), and worked both within
and outside of the formal public involvement process to influence the design of an arterial highway in their
neighborhood. This case reflects a commonplace context for public participation: residents opposing a highway
expansion and the negative effects of heavy traffic in neighborhood. The problem presented in this case is that
the process for citizen involvement was not designed to fully utilize the community’s collective capacity. Three
aspects of collective action—representation, the ability to shape a policy agenda, and methods of engagement—
were contested in the public participation process. We argue that these conflicts around collective action in the
public participation process exposed its “one-way communication,” and enabled a different kind of political
process in which neighbors’ organizing was powerful and influenced decisions.

Abstract Index #: 689
SHORT-TERM, LONG-TERM, AND NON-LINEAR EFFECTS OF GASOLINE PRICES ON TRANSIT RIDERSHIP IN TEN US
URBANIZED area, USING FIXED EFFECTS PANEL DATA ANALYSIS
Abstract System ID#: 83
Individual Paper
ALI , Rubaba [University of Maryland at College Park] rali1@umd.edu
Gasoline price increases since 1999 have generated substantial discussions on how they affect people’s travel
behavior. In particular, rising gasoline prices have been linked to increased demand for transit. This paper
presents the second part of analysis results based on the research funded by the Mineta Transportation Institute,
following up on the paper presented last year: “Fixed Effects Panel Data Analysis of Gasoline Prices, Fare, Service
Supply, and Service Frequency on Transit Ridership in Ten U.S. Urbanized area.”
Using panel data of transit ridership and monthly gasoline prices for ten selected US urbanized area over the
period from 2003 to 2011, this study analyzes the effect of gasoline prices on ridership of the four main modes of
transit—bus, light rail, heavy rail, and commuter rail—as well as their aggregate. While the previous paper
focused on: (1) the treatment of endogeneity between the supply of services and ridership and (2) the effects of
gasoline prices and three internal factors to transit agencies – transit fare, service supply, and service
frequency—this paper examines lagged and threshold effects of gasoline prices and varying elasticity values at
different gasoline prices, taking into account external factors, such as economic conditions and socio-economic
characteristics of travelers.
The data for an analysis are obtained from the US Energy Information Administration, the National Transit
Database of US Department of Transportation (DOT) Federal Transit Administration that provides operation and
financial data for transit agencies, the American Community Survey 1-year data between 2005 and 2011 for
demographic and socio-economic variables, and Highway Statistics Series from US DOT Federal Highway
Administration.
The analysis results show varying values of elasticity, depending on modes and conditions. Strong evidence was
found for positive elasticity for bus ridership and for ridership of all modes combined, while ones for light rail and
heavy rail were inconclusive. The bus ridership elasticity was found larger in a long term than in a short term and
for gasoline prices over $3 than gasoline prices below $3. The elasticity for commuter rail was found negative for
gasoline prices lower than $3, while it was positive for the prices over $3, as well as for a long term.
Findings in this study have important implications for public transportation planning as the fluctuation of transit
ridership due to gasoline prices can substantially affect fare revenue and the level of crowding in the transit
system. A ridership increase in peak periods may require a substantial increase in service supply and even facility
capacity, and pose challenges in service planning for transit agencies that are operating at the maximum supply
level and experiencing overcrowding during peak-periods.

References
 Chen, Cynthia, Don Varley, and Jason Chen, “What Affects Transit Ridership? A Dynamic Analysis
involving Multiple Factors, Lags, And Asymmetric Behavior.” Urban Studies, Vol. 48, No. 9, July (2010):
1893-1908.
 Currie, G., and J. Phung. 2007. Transit ridership, auto gas prices, and world events: New drivers of
change? Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board 1992: pp.3-10.
 Lane, Bradley W. 2010. “The Relationship Between Recent Gasoline Price Fluctuations and Transit
Ridership in Major U.S. city.” Journal of transportation Geography, Vol. 18, No. 2, pp. 214–225.
 Nowak, William P., and Ian Savage, “The cross elasticity between gasoline prices and transit use:
Evidence from Chicago.” Transit Policy, 29, (2013): 38-45.
 Stover, Victor W., and C. H. Christine Bae, “Impact of Gasoline Prices on Transit Ridership in Washington
State.” Transportation Research Record, Vol. 2217, (2011): 11-18.

Abstract Index #: 690
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MOTORIZED TRAVEL AND TIME SPENT ONLINE FOR NON-WORK PURPOSES: AN
EXAMINATION OF LOCATION IMPACT
Abstract System ID#: 89
Individual Paper
HONG, Jinhyun [University of Glasgow] jinhyun.hong@glasgow.ac.uk, presenting author, primary author
THAKURIAH, Piyushimita Vonu [University of Illinois at Chicago] vonu-pt@uic.edu
The influences of Information and Communications Technologies (ICT) on travel behaviour have been
investigated for several decades due to the potential of ICT to substitute face-to-face meetings, thus reducing
traffic volumes, and thereby lowering congestion and creating sustainable comminuty. A body of disaggregated
ICT-travel behaviour studies focused on specific ICT applications such as telecommuting or e-shopping to
estimate if ICT can reduce actual physical trips or generate more interactions between people or businesses in
different places, increasing travel demand (Mokhtarian and Salomon, 1997; Mokhtarian, 1998; Pendyala et al.,
1991). Moreover, some studies employed complicated analytical methodologies to examine the complex
relationship between the use of ICT and travel behaviour (Wang and Law, 2007; Farag et al., 2007).
Even though such studies provided valuable insights for planners, there are still many unknown connections
between the use of ICT and travel behaviour because ICT are of many different types, and travel behaviour is
determined with various factors and conditions. In addition, what has been the least known is whether the place
matters for the connection between the use of ICT and travel behaviour. Numerous empirical studies have shown
that there are significant effects of the built environment on travel behaviour and certain aspects such as
compact and mixed  land_uses can reduce auto dependency. Moreover, ICT can potentially change people’s travel
patterns by improving accessibility to transportation and diverse activities. Such findings imply that the attributes of a
place can shape people’s decisions regarding travel, and even though the use of ICT may increase or decrease the
chance of making physical trips, the intensity of such a relationship can vary according to people’s residential
locations due to the different levels of accessibility to opportunities.
This study focuses on the Internet use for non-work purposes and two research questions are examined: Does
the amount of time spent on the Internet affect motorized trip generation and motorized travel distance? how
do these effects vary according to residential locations such as urban, town and rural area where the levels of
accessibility are different?. To examine these two research questions, 2005-6 Scottish Household Survey was
used and Bayesian multilevel Poisson models and multilevel linear regressions were built.
We find there is a non-linear relationship between the amount of time spent on the Internet for personal
purposes and motorized mobility, with both very low-end as well as very high-end Internet users having lower
levels of motorized mobility, while moderate-intensity users having higher levels of motorized mobility. However,
these effects vary according to residential location; for example, people living in urban area have different levels

of motorized mobility according to the amount of time spent online, while no significant impact is identified for
people living in rural area.
Our study implies that people living in urban area in Scotland may use more motorized transportation modes
compared to the past because they could obtain rich information about diverse activities and transportation through
the Internet promptly. One important planning implication is that encouraging compact developments in
Scotland may not reduce motorized travel as planners expect because there is a significant complementary
relationship between the compactness and motorized travel with respect to the increased Internet use.
References
 Mokhtarian P, Salomon I (1997) Emerging travel patterns: Do telecommunications make a difference?
Institute of Transportation Studies, University of California, Davis,
 Mokhtarian P (1998) A synthetic approach to estimating the  impact of telecommuting on travel. Urban
Studies 35 (2):215-241
 Pendyala RM, Goulias KG, Kitamura R (1991) Impact of telecommuting on spatial and temporal patterns
of household travel. Transportation 18:383-409
 Wang D, Law F (2007 )  impact of information and communication technologies (ICT) on time use and
travel behaviour: a structural equations analysis Transportation 34 (4):513-527
 Farag S, Schwanen T, Dijst M, Faber J (2007) Shopping online and/or in-store? A structural equation
model of the relationships between e-shopping and in-store shopping. Transportation Research Part A
41:125-141

Abstract Index #: 691
NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTERISTICS THAT SUPPORT BICYCLE COMMUTING: ANALYSIS OF THE TOP 100 UNITED
STATES CENSUS TRACTS
Abstract System ID#: 103
Pre-organized Session: Making Cycling Mainstream
SCHNEIDER, Robert [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee] rjschnei@uwm.edu, presenting author, primary author
STEFANICH, Joseph [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee] stefan23@uwm.edu
According to the Alliance for Walking and Bicycling (2014), 47 of the 52 largest city in the US have established
goals to increase bicycling. comminuty that seek to increase bicycling often look to other city for examples of
bicycle-friendly policy, projects, and program. For example, the League of American Bicyclists (2014)
recognizes the city of Portland, OR, Minneapolis, MN, Davis, CA, and Boulder, CO as platinum-level BicycleFriendly comminuty. However, most city have large variation in bicycle activity between neighborhood. For
example, both Portland, OR and Minneapolis MN contain neighborhood with bicycle journey-to-work mode
shares greater than 15% and less than one percent. Finer-grained analyses are needed to understand factors
associated with bicycling. Therefore, this study uses neighborhood-level data to explore the following question:
what socioeconomic and local environment characteristics are found in neighborhood with the highest levels of
bicycle commuting in the United States? The findings can provide insights into policy that may be able to
increase bicycle commuting significantly in specific neighborhood.
Some of the most commonly-cited characteristics associated with bicycling are short distances between activity
locations, the presence and connectivity of bicycle facilities (e.g., bicycle lanes, multi-use trails, and cycle tracks),
bicycle parking, limited automobile parking supply and high parking cost, low automobile ownership, flat terrain,
and mild weather (Pucher, Dill, and Handy 2010; Heinen, van Wee, and Maat 2010). Several recent studies have
focused specifically on bicycle commuting to and from work. Bicycle commuting is associated with more on-road
bicycle lanes (Dill and Carr 2003), short distance to work (Buehler 2012), bicycle parking and showers at work
(Buehler 2012), and paying for automobile parking at work (Buehler 2012). Socioeconomic factors associated
with bicycle commuting include being male and identifying as White (Buehler 2012; Pucher, Buehler, and Seinen
2011), although bicycling is increasing among other ethnic groups (Pucher, Buehler, and Seinen 2011). An
analysis of nine large North American metropolitan area mapped bicycle commute data for sub-city area

(Pucher, Buehler, and Seinen 2011). These maps showed notable variation across each region, and the highest
levels of bicycling were generally found in neighborhood close to the regional central business district and close
to university campuses (Pucher, Buehler, and Seinen 2011). However, few studies have focused specifically on
neighborhoods with very high rates of bicycling to work.
This study identifies the 100 census tracts with the highest bicycle commute mode shares in the US (Top 100
census tracts) and pairs them with 100 other randomly-selected census tracts from the same counties (100
Comparison tracts). As a whole, the Top 100 tracts have a bicycle commute mode share of 21%. Seventy of the
Top 100 tracts are in locations that have fewer than 10 days per year with high temperatures below 32°F (0°C)
and 68 are within two miles (3.2 km) of a college or university campus. Seventeen have relatively low college
populations and are in high-density neighborhood close to large city central business districts. Conditional
logistic regression is used to estimate the likelihood of a paired tract being the Top 100 rather than the
Comparison tract. After controlling for climate and topography, being a Top 100 tract is associated with several
socioeconomic and local environment characteristics, including being located closer to a university and having
more households without automobiles, more people born in other states and countries, higher population
density, more housing constructed before 1940, and greater bicycle facility density. The results suggest that
policies to model employment centers after university campuses; design neighborhood that support routine,
multimodal travel; and reduce barriers to bicycling in bad weather may help increase neighborhood bicycle
commuting.
References
 Buehler, R. “Determinants of Bicycle Commuting in the Washington, DC Region: The Role of Bicycle
Parking, Cyclist Showers, and Free Car Parking at Work,” Transportation Research Part D, Volume 17, pp.
525-531, 2012.
 Dill, J. and T. Carr. “Bicycle Commuting and Facilities in Major U.S. city: If You Build Them, Commuters
Will Use Them,” Transportation Research Record, Volume 1828, pp. 116-123, 2003.
 Heinen, E., B. van Wee, and K. Maat. “Bicycle Use for Commuting: An Overview of the Literature,”
Transport Reviews, Volume 30, Number 1, pp. 59-96, 2010.
 Pucher, J., J. Dill, and S. Handy. “Infrastructure, program, and policy to Increase Bicycling: an
International Review,” Preventive Medicine, Volume 50, S106–S125, 2010.
 Pucher, J., R. Buehler, and M. Seinen. “Bicycling Renaissance in North America? An Update and Reappraisal of Cycling Trends and policy,” Transportation Research Part A, Volume 45, pp. 451-475, 2011.

Abstract Index #: 692
DYNAMIC PARKING PRICING: EVALUATING APPROACHES TO PRICE GRANULARITY AND FREQUENCY OF
ADJUSTMENT
Abstract System ID#: 107
Individual Paper
WILLSON, Richard [Cal Poly Pomona] rwwillson@cpp.edu, presenting author, primary author
ALLAHYAR, Arianna [University of Washington] allahyaran@pbworld.com
Parking pricing is transforming transportation and district management practices. comminuty that traditionally
provided free public parking are beginning to charge for it, while those that have charged fixed rates are moving
to system that modify parking prices to achieve desired parking occupancies. While traditional static parking
charges provide revenue and have some influence on parking locations and duration, they do not produce
efficient use of parking resources because the most desirable spaces are full most of the time. This paper
evaluates four west coast dynamic parking pricing projects that illustrate the range of approaches to varying
parking pricing, explaining how pricing strategy should be aligned to context.
Dynamic parking pricing varies price to achieve desired parking occupancy levels. It is becoming well established
and proven in practice (Shoup 2011, Pierce and Shoup 2013). Despite widespread agreement about the
advantages of dynamic parking pricing, there are differences of opinion on how parking prices should be

adjusted. Conventional practice is a stable pricing scheme implemented in simple pricing zones. Adjustments
require political decisions and are seldom made. This system offers drivers certainty about price but is inefficient.
On the other hand, occupancy-responsive, block- and time-specific pricing can better achieve desired space
occupancy targets, e.g., setting a price so one or two space always available on each blockface. These strategies
usually set a schedule of prices by parking location, time of day, or day of the week. Regular, staff-driven
modification of prices seek to achieve adopted occupancy goals.
This paper compares practices and results in four case studies: Los Angeles, CA, Redwood City, CA, San Francisco,
CA, and Seattle, WA. We explain the pricing adjustment scheme in each locale and provide insights from
interviews with local parking managers and academic and consultant evaluations. The material is organized in an
outcome framework that includes: delivering targeted occupancy rates, revenues and expenditures, equipment
and sensor reliability, administrative operability, parking and customer feedback, and political feasibility.
The current state of dynamic pricing practice is to make adjustments on monthly or bi-monthly basis using
predefined occupancy level thresholds, either average block face occupancy or the fraction of time a block face is
at defined levels. There is no evidence of a consumer or political backlash to adjustments on this frequency of
adjustment, although signage explaining time-of-day prices must be clear. Evaluations show that this adjustment
frequency increases the percentage of block faces meeting target occupancy levels, but there are concerns with
limitations on the frequency and amount of price changes, and the impact of disabled placard abuse. While
dynamic pricing is used in some off-street public parking, private off-street parking often follows its own pricing
protocols, and is therefore uncoordinated with the public parking scheme.
We conclude that the level of granularity and frequency of adjustment in dynamic pricing should respond to
community context. Further, promising next steps in dynamic pricing include (1) adjustments based on peak use
days or periods, such as peak holiday shopping days or seasons, (2) fuller integration of public and private parking
resources, (3) reforming disabled parking rules to ensure pricing effectiveness, and (4) real-time dynamic pricing
in locations with advanced parking applications and parking information system.
References
 Shoup, Donald. 2011. The High Cost of Free Parking, Updated Edition. Chicago, IL: American Planning
Association
 Willson, Richard, 2015. Parking Management for Smart Growth. Washington DC: Island Press.
 Pierce, Gregory and Donald Shoup. 2013. “Getting the Prices Right: An Evaluation of Pricing Parking by
Demand in San Francisco.” Journal of the American Planning Association. 79(1) 67-81.
 Millard-Ball, A., Weinberger, R. and R.C. Hampire. (2014) Is the curb 80% Fill or 20% Empty? Assessing
the  impact of San Francisco’s Parking Pricing Experiment. Transportation Research Part A:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2014.02.016.
 San Francisco Municipal Transportation Agency. 2014. “SFpark Pilot Project Evaluation Summary.”
Accessed July 7, 2014. http://sfpark.org/docs_evalsummary

Abstract Index #: 693
AIRPORTS AND LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: CAN PLANNERS SUPPORT JOB CREATION IN AIRPORT
ZONES?
Abstract System ID#: 110
Individual Paper
MOSBAH, Simon [University of Pennsylvania] smosbah@design.upenn.edu
Many planners and local government officials consider that air traffic is essential to metropolitan area’ economic
vitality, which is certainly true in a global economy. For instance, the Metropolitan Planning Organization for
Philadelphia, DVRPC, includes among its key transportation indicators the number of passenger trips taken at
Philadelphia International Airport. Urban economists have recently found that air traffic has a small but
significant impact on job creation, especially for services jobs at the Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) scale

(Green 2007, Sheard 2014). However, the spatial distribution of these effects at a smaller scale than the MSA –
primarily in area proximate to the airport – is of concern to planners, who can play an important role in
designing policy and initiatives to bolster these effects, especially job creation.
Initiatives to enhance job creation around the airport include infrastructure investments like airport capacity
expansions, and various “spatial planning models of airport-driven urban development” (Freestone and Baker
2011). However, the effects of such endeavors remain understudied. In the U.S, some airports have morphed
from gateways to major job centers in their own right, like the Dulles corridor or the Memphis FedEx hub, but
systematic studies of airports as economic sub-centers remain scarce and contested (Appold and Kasarda 2013,
Cidell 2014). Planners and policy-makers alike would benefit from more studies on the airport as employment
sub-center and on the factors supporting job creation around airports, especially since these area are often
underprivileged, and since economic growth thanks to air traffic carries a heavy environment cost.
This paper aims to fill this gap by investigating in depth the immediate surroundings of U.S. airports, which I call
“airport zones”. It addresses two questions: To what extent does the presence of an airport support job creation
in its immediate surroundings, i.e. the airport zones, across U.S. metropolitan area? Do airport expansions and
air traffic growth influence job creation in these airport zones?
I define airport zones by drawing concentric circles (up to a 10-kilometer radius) around airports and calculating
job-density gradients using the airport as a center. Then, I build a typology of these airport zones, using crosssectional descriptive statistics, in addition to airport (capacity, traffic, hubbing, distance to CBD…), and MSA
characteristics (population size, total and sectorial employment…). Finally, I perform a fixed-effects panel data
analysis, with the number of jobs in the airport zone as the dependent variable. Independent variables include
air traffic (passengers and freight), capacity expansion, and existence of an airport special district. Control
variables include nationwide and MSA-level GDP, as well as employment. Interviews of city officials and planners
add depth to the findings and airport-specific information.
I use a relatively new dataset, the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) data, to map jobs by sector
around 42 major commercial airports located in 38 MSAs. LEHD data is available between 2002 and 2011, a
period of significant airport expansions, and provides more precise granularity than Zip code Business Patterns,
while not undergoing censorship for certain sectors and geographies. I have built historical air traffic data, in
particular for number of destinations, thanks to the Bureau of Transportation Statistics’ T-100 dataset. Airport
expansion data is available from the Federal Aviation Authority.
This research is ongoing, but a diversity of airport zones emerges, challenging general optimism of city officials
for airport-based economic development across the spectrum of airports: while some airports support strong job
sub-centers, others airport zones are relatively weaker with lower job density than in surrounding area.
References
 Appold, Stephen J., and John D. Kasarda. 2013. “The Airport City Phenomenon: Evidence from Large US
Airports.” Urban Studies 50 (6): 1239–59.
 Cidell, Julie. 2014. “The Role of Major Infrastructure in Subregional Economic Development: An Empirical
Study of Airports and city.” Journal of Economic Geography, July, 1–20.
 Freestone, Robert, and Douglas Baker. 2011. “Spatial Planning Models of Airport-Driven Urban
Development.” Journal of Planning Literature 26 (3): 263–79.
 Green, Richard K. 2007. “Airports and Economic Development.” Real Estate Economics 35 (1): 91–112.
 Sheard, Nicholas. 2014. “Airports and Urban Sectoral Employment.” Journal of Urban Economics 80
(March): 133–52.

Abstract Index #: 694
EXTENSION OF MASS RAPID TRANSIT NETWORK AND RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY VALUES: EVIDENCE FROM THE
OPENING OF NORTHEAST AND CIRCLE LINE IN SINGAPORE
Abstract System ID#: 137

Individual Paper
DIAO, Mi [National University of Singapore] rstdm@nus.edu.sg
Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) has been widely considered an efficient and environmently friendly mode of
transport to address urban transportation challenges. To meet the increasing demand for travel, the Singapore
Government has been continually expanding the MRT network during the past decades and plans to double the
total length of MRT tracks from the current 178 km to about 360 km in 2030. The extension of MRT network in
Singapore provides an ideal setting to estimate the actual impact of new transit investment on property values as
a result of improved accessibility.
In this paper, we use a difference-in-differences (DID) estimator within the hedonic price modelling framework to
isolate the causal effect of MRT network extension on residential property values, by comparing the transaction
price “before and after” the inauguration of new MRT lines through a “treatment” group versus a “control”
groups. Local polynomial fitting are employed to identify the treatment zone of new MRT stations based on the
network distance from transacted properties to the nearest stations. The modelling framework was applied to
the opening of the Circle Line (CCL) and North East Line (NEL) in Singapore. We find that the opening of the NEL
increased the value of public housing units within 800 meters of new NEL stations by between 11.1% and 13%.
The opening of the CCL increased the value of private housing units within 1200 meters of new CCL stations by
between 3.04% and 3.16%.
This study provides more reliable estimates of the value-added effect of transit investment compared to
conventional cross-sectional hedonic price analysis and contributes to more informed policy design for value
capture program.
References
 W. Alonso (1964). Location and  land_use: Toward a General Theory of Land Rent. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, Mass.
 E. Mills (1972). Studies in the Structure of the Urban Economy, Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins University
Press.
 D. Bowes, and K. Ihlanfeldt (2001). Identifying the  impact of Rail Transit Stations on Residential
Property Values. Journal of Urban Economics 50(1): 1-25.

Abstract Index #: 695
THE STREETCAR RESURGENCE IN THE U.S.: TRANSIT REVOLUTION OR GROWTH-MACHINE TACTIC?
Abstract System ID#: 142
Individual Paper
RAMOS SANTIAGO, Luis Enrique [Florida State University] ler12@my.fsu.edu, presenting author, primary author
BROWN, Jeffrey [Florida State University] jrbrown3@fsu.edu
NIXON, Hilary [San Jose State University] hilary.nixon@sjsu.edu
The reinsertion of late 19th/early 20th century streetcar transit technology in many U.S. city is one of the most
remarkable transportation events of the early 21st century. Prior studies have primarily considered the
streetcar’s role as a transit investment, and typically found very poor ridership results for the amount of
investment being made. However, there is considerable evidence to suggest that the modern-era streetcar is
primarily an economic development tool as opposed to primarily being a transportation investment, and thus it is
the most recent example of a larger and older downtown re-purposing, revitalization, and redevelopment
agenda.
The authors examine this proposition using a multiple case study investigation of the modern-era streetcars
operated in five U.S. city: Little Rock, Memphis, Portland, Seattle, and Tampa. Using a combination of urban
planning and political-economy literature as a research framework, the authors employ a mixed-methods

research design that uses key informant interviews with more than 20 planners, developers, business leaders and
other key local actors, planning and policy documents, newspaper accounts, and ridership and survey data
obtained from transit agencies to identify the key events, agents, goals, and perceived outcomes associated with
the streetcars implemented in each city. The authors identify similarities and differences across the cases to
better understand the streetcar’s emergence as a downtown economic development tool.
The authors find that the modern-era streetcar phenomena is the latest of a series of capital-intensive, multidecade, downtown revitalization projects initiated mostly by local private sector and led by private-public
coalitions within a mixed but asymmetrical public-private investment program. As such, the implementation of
modern U.S. streetcars is the most recent tactic of downtown growth-machine coalitions. In most cases the
transit goal is secondary or even non-existent, with development and economic-growth purposes emerging as
the dominant policy and decision-making orientation among key actors involved in each city. The perceived
performance of streetcar as a development tool by local key-informants is generally good with informants
pointing to its role more as a catalyst rather than a causal factor of economic development activity. These
assertions are voiced despite the absence of any careful empirical study of these development effects in most
cities. The modern-era streetcar’s role as symbol of downtown and key element in local city identity emerges as
an additional common theme across the cases.
The authors suggest that re-framing the study of the modern-era streetcar phenomena within a politicaleconomy discourse offers a better and more nuanced understanding of its downtown historical context, evinces
the political-economic forces behind its planning and implementation, and reveals important links to its overall
performance as a transit and/or development tool. These insights should better inform land-use and
transportation planners, local decision-makers, and civic organizations that seek to advance sustainable transit
and urban (downtown) revitalization efforts, as well as those currently considering, planning and implementing
streetcars in their comminuty.
References
 Brown, J., Nixon, H., and Ramos, L.E. (2015). The Purpose, Function, and Performance of Streetcar
Transit in the Modern U.S. City: A Multiple-Case-Study Investigation. Mineta Transportation Institute,
San Jose (CA). Retrieved from http://transweb.sjsu.edu/PDFs/research/1201-streetcar-transit-inmodern-US-cities.pdf
 Krumholz, N., & Keating, W. (1991). Downtown plans of the 1980s: The case for more equity in the
1990s. Journal of the American Planning Association, 57(2), 136-152. doi:10.1080/01944369108975483
 Logan, J. R., Whayle, R., and Crowder, K. (1997). The Character and Consequences of Growth Regimes:
An Assessment of Twenty Years of Research. Urban Affairs Review Vol. 32 No. 5, pp. 603-630.
 Molotch, H. L. (1976). “The City as a Growth Machine”. In LeGates and Stout (editors) The City Reader,
pp. 251-262.
 Robertson, K. A. (1995). Downtown redevelopment strategies in the United States: An end-of-thecentury assessment. Journal of the American Planning Association, 61(4), 429.

Abstract Index #: 696
CROWDSOURCED BICYCLE ROUTES: FOSTERING PLANNING FOR TRANSPORTATION JUSTICE FOR MANY, OR A
SELECT FEW?
Abstract System ID#: 146
Individual Paper
GRIFFIN, Greg [University of Texas at Austin] gregpgriffin@utexas.edu
If the dictum ‘what gets measured, gets done’ is true, then planning for bicycle transportation lags behind urban
aspirations for livability. New technologies, such as smartphone apps tracking bicycle routes, offer a way for
planners to have low-cost data crowdsourced by bicyclists themselves. But is the population of smartphone app
users sufficient to improve transportation justice? Two opposing viewpoints are offered: 1) bicycle volumes taken
from smartphone apps restrict contributions to a more affluent audience, and could bias transportation planning

results away from low-income comminuty; and 2) people who bicycle are already an under-served
transportation community (Misra et al. 2014), and information from Strava, or similar apps foster more data (and
better planning) from a broader group of bicyclists, regardless of income. The challenge of internet and
smartphone access has been explored deeply in socio-economic studies, but its implication for transportation
planning needs explicit focus. Additionally, transportation research is documenting a breadth of bicycle
monitoring methods, but they still lack critical perspective on the broader issues of population representation
and planning policy.
This study uses both empirical and normative approaches to evaluate the two perspectives of crowdsourced
bicycle routes. First, we compare a bicyclist traffic data sample from the Strava smartphone application with
actual counts of the all users at sampled locations during the same time period, and bicycle commuting statistics
from the American Community Survey (ACS). We evaluate smartphone use at the national level using detailed
cross tabulations obtained from the Pew Internet Project –25th Anniversary of the Web survey, in order to assess
changes in smartphone adoption over time by race and income.
We evaluate the spatial correlation of commute trip origin locations reported in the Strava dataset with
residential bicycle commuting responses from the ACS using geostatistics. Normative concepts of justice and
public participation are evaluated through Ageyman’s just sustainability paradigm (2005), which seeks to bridge
environmental justice with a sustainability discourse often lacking in equity perspective. Additionally,
crowdsourced bicycle volumes are considered to the degree they could constitute public participation through
Schlossberg and Shuford’s comparison of the conception of “public” in public participation geographic
information system (2005). To evaluate transportation justice with only empirical methods could lead to
reductionist conclusions, so this study also uses normative frameworks of just sustainabilities and participation as
well.
Crowdsourcing of planning information is increasing in planning practice, but we have few case studies from
research, and scant guidance to students and practitioners for effective incorporation into planning practice. This
study looks at the crowdsourcing of bicycle volumes as an example of a new dataset that can expand knowledge
about bicycling in a locale, and evaluates how planners and researchers can view this type of information from a
transportation justice perspective. Rather than providing conclusive statements on more equitable planning using
new big data sources, this study provides signposts of early evidence useful for additional research and planning
practice in transportation justice.
References
 Agyeman, Julian. 2005. “The Sustainability Discourse and Sustainable comminuty.” In Sustainable
Communities and the Challenge of environment Justice, 39–78. New York: New York University Press.
 Misra, Aditi, Aaron Gooze, Kari Watkins, Mariam Asad, and Christopher A. Le Dantec. 2014.
“Crowdsourcing and Its Application to Transportation Data Collection and Management.” Transportation
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board 2414: 1–8.
 Schlossberg, Marc, and Elliot Shuford. 2005. “Delineating ‘Public’ and ‘Participation’ in PPGIS.” URISA
Journal 16 (2): 15–26.

Abstract Index #: 697
IF YOU BUILD RAIL TRANSIT IN SUBURBS, WILL DEVELOPMENT COME?
Abstract System ID#: 148
Individual Paper
DONG, Hongwei [California State University, Fresno] hdong@csufresno.edu
This study uses longitudinal data to assess land and economic development within walking distance of rail transit
stations in suburbs of Portland (Oregon) from 2004 to 2014. The study serves two research purposes by
documenting and analyzing the changes of  land_use and employment structure in 57 rail transit station area over
a period of 10 years in suburban Portland. First, it illustrates diverse temporal and spatial patterns of transit

oriented development (TOD) in an American metropolitan area that is well known for its efforts in smart growth.
Second, it explores effective planning tools that can be used to encourage TOD in American suburbs. A key
question this study attempts to answer is why some suburban rail transit stations are more successful than
others in promoting TOD in their surrounding area.
To address this question, this study adopts both descriptive and modeling approaches. Using ArcGIS tools, I first
calculate a set of indicators to measure different dimensions of TOD in 57 suburban rail transit station area of
eight rail transit lines in 2-year intervals between 2004 and 2014. I then calculate the changes of these indicators
over time and visualize them in graphs to show their temporal and spatial dynamics. Next, I estimate mixedeffect models on the basis of a longitudinal and panel data set to analyze the changes of TOD indicators as a
function of an array of variables that include zoning and  land_use plan, government incentives, transit ridership,
the built environment, and local social-economic characteristics. The longitudinal and panel data set enables us
to observe a broad cross-section of TODs over time and allows us to study the dynamics of  land_use and economy
in suburban rail transit station area. It also helps to address the endogeneity problem, which has been a major
hindrance to studying the  land_use effects of transportation investment (Giuliano, 2004).
This study contributes to the literature in several ways. First, a central theme of this study is to analyze why some
suburban rail transit stations are more successful than others in encouraging TOD by comparing rail transit
stations that were opened at different times and in different locations. This makes it different from previous
studies (e.g. Cervero and Landis, 1997) that use quasi-experimental comparisons to test whether public transit
alters land development patterns by comparing transit service area to a control group, which is notoriously
difficult to find. Second, most existing work on the  impact of transit on land development has been focused on
the property value effects (e.g. Knaap, Ding, and Hopkins, 2001), where data are more readily available. There are
much fewer studies that directly measure longitudinal changes of land development patterns and employment
structures at fine spatial scales in suburban rail transit station area. This study partially fills this gap by analyzing
a relative large sample of data for 57 stations of eight different rail transit lines over a period of 10 years. A large
sample size allows us to observe a diverse topology of TOD in rail transit station area and their temporal
dynamics. Third, a recent study (Chatman and Noland, 2014) at an aggregate scale indicates that the economic
benefits of transit improvement are much more prominent in central city than in suburban area. In this study, I
focus on suburban rail transit stations, identifying policy tools and locational factors that have helped to promote
TOD in suburbs.
The results of this study inform policy in at least two ways. First, by identifying effective policy tools that
encourage TOD in rail transit station area, it improves our understanding of whether and how TOD related land
use policy work in the real world (Boarnet and Compin, 1999). Second, by analyzing locational and socioeconomic characteristics that have helped foster TOD in station area, it helps policymakers to make better
locational and timing decisions for future rail transit projects in American suburbs.
References
 Boarnet, M.G., and Compin, N.S. (1999) Transit-oriented development is San Diego County: the
incremental implementation of a planning idea. Journal of the American Planning Association, 65(1): 8095.
 Cervero, R., and Landis, J. (1997) Twenty years of bay area rapid transit system:  land_use and
development  impact. Transportation Research Part A, 31(4): 309-333.
 Chatman, D.G. and Noland, R. (2014) Transit Service, physical agglomeration and productivity in US
metropolitan area. Urban Studies, 51(5): 917-937.
 Giuliano, G. (2004)  land_use  impact of transportation investment: highway and transit, in Hanson and
Giuliano, Geography of Urban Transportation (3rd edition), pp. 59-85.
 Knapp, G.J., Ding, C., and Hopkins, L.D. (2001) Do plans matter? The effects of light rail plans on land
values in station area. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 21: 32-39.

Abstract Index #: 698
ASSESSING MOBILITY OPTIONS FOR TRANSPORTATION DISADVANTAGED: A GAP ANALYSIS IN FLORIDA
Abstract System ID#: 150
Individual Paper
NOH, Soowoong [University of Florida] nswscott@ufl.edu
Background:
The state of Florida has the highest percentage of elderly population (65+) in the nation and the numbers are
projected to grow to over 27% of its population by year 2030, a wide margin compared to 19 percent national
average. With older age comes the challenge of mobility dependence in later life. In addition to elderly, other
disadvantaged populations such as individuals with disabilities and people who don’t own a vehicle face similar
mobility limitations. These trends create an even greater impetus for development of alternative transportation
options and policy and advocacy efforts to improve the safety, access, and mobility for Florida’s transportation
disadvantaged.
Study Design:
In order to ensure transportation that meets a variety of individual needs and circumstances, a continuum of
transportation is required. Toward the aims of informing policy and provision of alternative mobility options to
meet the changing needs of Florida’s transportation disadvantaged, this study looks at analysis methods that
incorporate Geographic Information system (GIS) to assess the existing network of alternative transportation
and to identify broad gaps in the service availability for seniors, people with disabilities, and people without
access to automobile. Based on these three disadvantaged populations, we investigate service availability at two
geographic levels: county and regions (group of counties) as defined by Florida highway safety plan. After
mapping distribution of each transportation disadvantaged category at the county level and the geolocation of
various transportation providers, the study develops a broad measure of transportation accessibility defined as
number of transportation disadvantaged by service provider for counties and regions.
Preliminary Results:
The study finds that the greatest gaps in service availability are in the 26 small rural counties. For bigger urban
counties such as Miami-Dade, the study finds lack of sufficient transportation availability especially for the
disabled and people that don’t own a vehicle. The medium size counties tend to have a much greater number of
population without a vehicle per service provider compared to other counties.
Conclusion/Contribution:
This study assesses transportation gaps for the needs of the growing elderly population as well as other
transportation disadvantaged. The contributions of this study are: First, the findings from this research can be
used to guide policy and plan to target improvement of transportation options for the disadvantaged. Second,
the map-based visualized results are useful not only to stimulate related academic disciplines but also to provide
valuable information to urban policy makers and transportation professionals on how to work together to
address mutual challenges.
References
 Banister, D., & Bowling, A. (2004). Quality of life for the elderly: the transportation dimension. Transport
Policy, 11(2), 105-115.
 Foley, D. J., Heimovitz, H. K., Guralnik, J. M., & Brock, D. B. (2002). Driving Life Expectancy of Persons
Aged 70 Years and Older in the United States. American Journal of Public Health, 92(8), 1284-1289.
 Metz, D. H. (2000). Mobility of older people and their quality of life. transportation Policy, 7(2), 149-152.
 Sherrilene, C., Sandra, W., & Ellen, D. S. L. (2009). Meta-synthesis of Qualitative Studies on Older Driver
Safety and Mobility. The Occupational Therapy Journal of Research: Occupation, Participation and
Health, 29(1), 24-31.
 The Safe Mobility for Life Coalition (2011). Aging Road User Strategic Safety Plan (pp. 28): Florida
Department of Transportation.

Abstract Index #: 699
ARE COHORT EFFECTS REAL? A NATIONAL INQUIRY ON THE ELASTICITY OF  land_use ON TRAVEL BEHAVIOR
AMONG BIRTH AND IMMIGRATION COHORTS
Abstract System ID#: 151
Individual Paper
WANG, Xize [University of Southern California] xizewang@usc.edu
Central theme and hypothesis
The rich literature on transportation and  land_use has found that a compact, new-urbanist neighborhood design
can reduce driving and increase travel in alternative modes. In the near future, a large number of Millennials and
long-settled immigrants will seek to own houses and a large number of baby-boomers will retire. Such
demographic shifts posit an important question: will Millennials and immigrants travel in ways that change the
 land_use – travel behavior relationships recently documented?
The hypothesis of this study is that different cohorts of the American population, defined by birth year for the
native-born and by length stay in the US for foreign-born, respond differently to different  land_use patterns.
Approach and methodology
The study conducts a national-level inquiry using a repeated cross-sectional data set based on 2001 and 2009
National Household Travel Surveys (NHTS). Specifically, the study tests the elasticity of a variety of  land_use
variables by interacting the  land_use variables with cohort membership dummy variables. The  land_use variables
include population density and housing density at both the survey respondent’s residential and employment
location. The travel behavior variables include: personal VMT, car passenger trips, car driver trips, transit trips
and active travel trips. Cohort membership is defined as the decade of birth year for the native-born respondent
and the years of staying in the US (less than 10, 10-20 and more than 20 years) for the foreign-born respondents.
Relevance to planning education, practice or scholarship
The study shows that the different birth and immigration cohorts do have statistically significant difference for
 land_use – travel behavior elasticity values. Specifically, the Millennials and the new immigrants have higher
elasticity of residential density than baby-boomers. For instance, the elasticity of residential density on personal
VMT of the native-born respondents born in the 1950s is around 20% lower than those born in the 1980s and
around 60% lower than the foreign born respondents staying in the US for less than 10 years.
The results indicate that the “policy significance” of  land_use changes, for Millennials and recent immigrants, is
larger than for the older native-born or longer-settled population. This implies an opportunity to further
transform our city to become more sustainable, as demographic shifts may create opportunities for greater
leverage for  land_use policy. This also implies that travel models that do not take account of shifting
demographics may over-predict personal vehicle use. In addition, examining such different “policy sensitivity”
levels among different demographic groups provides evidences on  land_use and transportation policy targeting on
special neighborhood such as senior home comminuty or immigrant enclaves.
References
 Blumenberg, Evelyn, Brian D. Taylor, Michael Smart, Kelcie Ralph, Madeline Wander, and Stephen
Brumbaugh. 2012. What's youth got to do with it? Exploring the travel behavior of teens and young
adults. University of California Transportation Center.
 Boarnet, Marlon G., Douglas Houston, Gavin Ferguson, and Steven Spears. 2011. " land_use and vehicle
miles of travel in the climate change debate: getting smarter than your average bear." In Climate Change
and Land policy, edited by Yu-Hung Hong and Gregory Ingram, 151-187. Cambridge, MA: Lincoln
Institute of Land Policy.
 Myers, D., and J. Pitkin. 2009. "Demographic forces and turning points in the American city, 1950-2040."
The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 626 (1):91-111.





Scheiner, Joachim, and Christian Holz-Rau. 2013. "A comprehensive study of life course, cohort, and
period effects on changes in travel mode use." Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 47
(0):167-181.
Tal, Gil, and Susan Handy. 2010. "Travel behavior of immigrants: An analysis of the 2001 National
Household Transportation Survey." transportation Policy 17 (2):85-93.

Abstract Index #: 700
ON AGING AMERICANS' TRAVEL PREFERENCES
Abstract System ID#: 154
Individual Paper
PAN, Xiaohong [Columbia University] xpgsapp@gmail.com
Population aging creates various challenges to transportation planning and operating agencies, as well as to
private sectors of transportation services. By 2030, 20 percent of the U.S. population will be over age 65 (Census,
2012). These elderly people demand dependable transportation access so they can remain independent and age
in place (Farber and Shinkle, 2011; Nelson, 2013). To improve seniors’ transportation access, understanding their
travel preferences is crucial. However, the aging baby boomer generation differs from their prior generations in
many ways. They are better educated, wealthier, healthier, and more racially and ethnically diverse. They are
likely to stay in the labor force longer and to be more active beyond traditional retirement (WHCOA, 2005). As a
result, aging boomers are likely to have different travel behavior and transportation needs from what we planned
or have been planning for their prior generations and other age groups. In this research, I examine whether
seniors’ travel behavior change as they age and what factors might affect baby boomers’ travel preferences.
This paper conducts a cross-sectional survey analysis on the 2009 National Household Travel Survey to investigate
whether the predominant travel preference – favoring automobile travel – hold for different senior age groups,
while controlling for different socio-demographic, built environment, and transportation attributes. This analysis
finds no evidence that Americans are giving us driving as they age. Thus I argue that planning as though seniors
want to drive less is not likely to be successful; specifically, traditional public transportation options might not
suit for aging boomers, and more diversified auto-alike transportation options are necessary. In addition, I
consider behavioral aspects (such as attitudes towards safety, congestion, and public transit) in the analysis. I
hypothesize that these behavioral aspects affect seniors’ travel preferences, and that their effects are stronger on
seniors than younger generations. This hypothesis, if true, implies that promoting positive attitudes on certain
travel options that were otherwise not preferred by seniors (e.g., public transit) could be a way to encourage
seniors to change their travel choices. In summary, by studying senior’s travel preferences, this research
generates useful information for practices to modify existing services, adopt best-practice solutions, as well as
develop innovative options to improve senior’s transportation access.
References
 US Census. (2012). Table 3. Percent Distribution of the Projected Population by Selected Age Groups and
Sex for the United States: 2015 to 2060. Retrieved from
http://www.census.gov/population/projections/data/national/2012/summarytables.html. Accessed in
Feb., 2015.
 Nicholas Farber and Douglas Shinkle. (2011). Aging in Place: A State Survey of Livability policy and
Practices. http://assets.aarp.org/rgcenter/ppi/liv-com/aging-in-place-2011-full.pdf. Accessed Feb., 2015.
 Bill Nelson. (2013). Opening Statement for the hearing on “Transportation: A Challenge to Independence
for Seniors” before the U.S. Senate Special Committee on Aging.
 White House Conference on Aging (WHCOA). (2005). The Booming Dynamics of Aging: From Awareness
to Action.

Abstract Index #: 701
EXPLORING THE CARGO BIKE AS A TOOL FOR MODE SUBSTITUTION BEHAVIOR
Abstract System ID#: 168
Pre-organized Session: Making Cycling Mainstream
RIGGS, William [California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo] wriggs@calpoly.edu
Cargo bikes are increasing in availability in the United States. While a large body of research has continued to
investigate traditional bike transportation, cargo bikes offer the potential to capture trips that might otherwise
be made by car. To investigate this, data from a survey of cargo bike users were evaluated using descriptive and
inferential statistics, with the hypothesis that cargo bikes have the potential to contribute to mode substitution
behavior. From a descriptive standpoint, 68.9% of respondents indicated a change in their travel behavior after
purchasing a cargo bike and the number of auto trips appeared to decline by 1-2 trips per day. Two key reasons
cited for this change include the ability to get around with children and the ability to carry more gear. This was
confirmed by regression models which underscore this trend. Based on these results, further research could
include focus on overcoming weather-related / elemental barriers, which continue to be an obstacle to every day
cycling, and also could further investigation how families with children that use cargo bikes relate to active
transportation behavior in later life.
References
 Akar, G., & Clifton, K. (2009). Influence of Individual Perceptions and Bicycle Infrastructure on Decision
to Bike. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2140(-1), 165–
172. doi:10.3141/2140-18
 Blanco, H., Alberti, M., Forsyth, A., Krizek, K. J., Rodriguez, D. A., Talen, E., & Ellis, C. (2009). Hot,
congested, crowded and diverse: Emerging research agendas in planning. Progress in Planning, 71(4),
153–205.
 Gössling, S. (2013). Urban transportation transitions: Copenhagen, City of Cyclists. Journal of Transport
Geography, 33, 196–206. doi:10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2013.10.013
 Gruber, J., Kihm, A., & Lenz, B. (n.d.). A new vehicle for urban freight? An ex-ante evaluation of electric
cargo bikes in courier services. Research in Transportation Business & Management.
doi:10.1016/j.rtbm.2014.03.004
 Lovejoy, K., Handy, S., Pucher, J., & Buehler, R. (2012). Developments in bicycle equipment and its role in
promoting cycling as a travel mode. City Cycling, 75–104.

Abstract Index #: 702
FORECASTING TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS FOR THE REGIONAL PLANNING IN SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA REGION
Abstract System ID#: 186
Poster
VO, Tom [Southern California Association of Governments] vo@scag.ca.gov, presenting author, primary author
CHENG, Wen [Cal Poly Pomona Civil Engineering Department] wcheng@csupomona.edu
WEN, Frank [Southern California Association of Governments] wen@scag.ca.gov
CHOI, Simon [Southern California Association of Governments] choi@scag.ca.gov
HU, Hsi-Hwa [Southern California Association of Governments] hu@scag.ca.gov
Traffic accidents have become one of the most discussed topics in the transportation professional field,
specifically in planning. There are workshops and tools to encourage the participation of transportation planners
on road safety. However, applications to predict traffic accident remain scarce at the regional planning level such
as the metropolitan planning organizations. The purpose of this research is to introduce traffic accident
forecasting to the transportation planning field and that crash prediction can be consistently predicted at the
regional planning level using transportation analysis zones as unit of analysis in the Southern California region.
Modeling and forecasting traffic accidents at the regional planning level may potentially help identifying hot
spots of accident locations, which is associated with the built environment; it may also be potential and beneficial

on allocating grants, understanding the  impact of safety countermeasures and initiating other useful planning
researches including, but not limit to, environment justice analysis.
This research’s framework and approach have taken under a consideration of several pioneer traffic safety
planning literatures that have considered important findings and variables, which are related to the built
environment. Ewing et al (2003, 2009) have stated that the urban sprawl in relation with the built environment
has been an important factor in causing traffic accidents due to the density varied from urban to suburban.
Additionally, Washington et al (2006) has also developed a planning level forecasting model called PLANSAFE that
included built environment, demographic, socioeconomic, and weather variables. These researches have given a
strong framework for modeling and forecasting traffic accidents in the Southern California region.
Descriptive statistics, multivariate regression, negative binomial, and simultaneous negative binomial regression
are utilized to model and forecast the traffic accident locations. Negative binomial and simultaneous negative
binomial are being incorporated into the research due to their capabilities of handling over-dispersed data and
simultaneity of traffic accident outputs (Guevara et al, 2004). The data in this research paper will be obtained
from several recognized sources such as the Southern California Association of Governments California Statewide
Integrated Traffic Records System, Transportation Injury Mapping System and Census Bureau. Crash data is
separated into injury and fatal traffic accidents. The explanatory variables are categorized into exposure,
socioeconomic, demographic, built environment, and transportation networks. Geographic Information System is
utilized for data collection, preparation, and management to perform spatial analysis. The Statistical Package for
the Social Sciences Statistics is used to perform various statistical analysis and model building. The ability of
forecasting traffic accidents is crucial for long-range planning in relation to transportation and  land_use planning
scenarios.
References
 Ewing, R. , & Dumbaugh, E. (2009). The built environment and traffic safety: A review of empirical
evidence. Journal of Planning Literature, 23(4), 347-367.
 Ewing, R. , Schieber, R. , & Zegeer, C. (2003). Urban sprawl as a risk factor in motor vehicle occupant and
pedestrian fatalities. American Journal of Public Health, 93(9), 1541-1545.
 Washington, S., Schalkwyk, I., Mitra, S., Meyer, M., Dumbaugh, E., & Zoll, M. (2006). Incorporating Safety
into Long-Range Transportation Planning. Transportation Research Board of the National Academies,
National Cooperative Highway Research Program Report 546.
 Guevara, F. L. De, Washington, S. P., & Oh, J. (2004). Forecasting Crashes at the Planning Level:
Simultaneous Negative Binomial Crash Model Applied in Tucson, Arizona. Transportation Research
Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 191-199

Abstract Index #: 703
BARRIERS TO BICYCLING FOR TRANSPORTATION AMONG POTENTIAL AND OCCASIONAL CYCLISTS
Abstract System ID#: 193
Pre-organized Session: Making Cycling Mainstream
SANDERS, Rebecca [University of Oklahoma] rebeccasanders@ou.edu
Though the percentage of people bicycling for transportation rose during the last decade, with an average
increase in bicycle commuting of 47% (League of American Bicyclists, 2013), still only 1% of all U.S. trips are made
by bike (Flusche 2010). Studies have documented multiple reasons for the small numbers, including physical and
psychological barriers to bicycling such as topography, trip distance, and perceived traffic risk (Cervero and
Duncan 2003; Dill and Voros 2007; Sener, Eluru et al. 2009; Winters, Davidson et al. 2010; Xing, Handy et al.,
2008). Yet researchers still lack a thorough understanding of how psychological barriers such as enjoyment or
perceived risk compare to physical barriers such as topography or weather. This lack of a holistic understanding
may explain why studies have only been able to attribute a portion of the variation in bicycling rates across city
(Cervero and Duncan 2003; Dill and Carr 2003). Furthermore, there is little understanding about perceived traffic
risk beyond the general finding that many people fear bicycling next to motorized traffic (Dill and Voros 2007;

Sener, Eluru et al. 2009; Winters, Davidson et al. 2010). For example, researchers and practitioners have little
empirical knowledge about how certain aspects of traffic risk compare to others in terms of their influence on a
person’s decision to bicycle for transportation—important information for determining strategies to address such
risk.
This paper presents evidence to help clarify how multiple barriers to cycling for transport—including potentially
risky aspects of cycling—compare to one another for various types of cyclists. The paper elaborates on results
from an internet survey examining these barriers for 307 potential and occasional bicyclists in the San Francisco
Bay Area, and categorizes the barriers according to their strength of influence for cyclists of various experience
levels. As expected, practical barriers such as trip distance and the need to carry belongings or passengers heavily
influence the decision to bicycle for transportation. However, perceived traffic risk also plays a strong role, such
that some cyclists who might bicycle for transportation—including current recreational cyclists—are dissuaded
from doing so even for trips that might otherwise be considered bikable. Additionally, the findings indicate that
certain types of traffic risk are much more influential than others, suggesting that targeted strategies for
addressing traffic risk may be beneficial.
The findings indicate that a multi-pronged strategy is needed to facilitate cycling in U.S. city, including both
short- and long-term efforts to make cycling more convenient. Efforts to improve perceived and actual traffic
safety for cyclists are also critical, and, for many cyclists, inextricably connected to the provision of bicyclespecific infrastructure—particularly infrastructure that is physically-separated from cars. Ultimately, this study
contributes to a greater epistemological understanding of barriers to bicycling—specifically the barrier of
perceived traffic risk—so that these impediments can be more thoroughly understood and addressed in practice.
References
 Cervero, R. and M. Duncan (2003). "Walking, Bicycling, and Urban Landscapes: Evidence from the San
Francisco Bay Area." American Journal of Public Health 93(9): 1478-1483.
 Dill, J. and K. Voros (2007). "Factors Affecting Bicycling Demand: Initial Survey Findings from the
Portland, Oregon, Region." Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research
Board (2031): pp 9-17.
 Dill, J. and T. Carr (2003). "Bicycle Commuting and Facilities in Major U.S. city: If You Build Them,
Commuters Will Use Them." Transportation Research Record (1828): p. 116-123.
 Sener, I. N., N. Eluru, et al. (2009). "Who are Bicyclists? Why and How Much Are They Bicycling?"
Transportation Research Record (2134): 63-72.
 Winters, M., G. Davidson, et al. (2010). "Motivators and deterrents of bicycling: comparing influences on
decisions to ride." Transportation: 1-16.

Abstract Index #: 704
NEIGHBORHOOD RESTRICTIONS AND DISPLACED CONSEQUENCES: THE LOCATION OF ALCOHOL-SERVING
ESTABLISHMENTS AND DWI CRASHES IN HOUSTON
Abstract System ID#: 202
Pre-organized Session: Traffic Safety Planning
LEVINE, Ned [Ned Levine & Associates] Ned@nedlevine.com
A study in the City of Houston was conducted that related the location of Alcohol Beverage Outlets (ABO) that
served alcohol after Midnight to late night driving-while-intoxicated (DWI) crashes. There is a very large
literature showing the negative social effects of excessive alcohol use on drunk driving, crime, spousal and child
abuse, suicide, and health problems. There is also a growing literature showing that higher concentrations of
ABOs in small area (outlet density) are associated with excessive drinking and subsequent harmful behavior.
What is not clear is how a city's policy on the locating of ABOs affects this behavior. In the City of Houston, the
City has deferred to local neighborhood, most of which are governed by private deed restrictions. The result is
that ABOs have been pushed into area where there are no such restrictions, typically in downtown, selected

commercial area, and transitional area. The purpose of the study is to show how the concentration of ABOs
has led to long DWI trips in the city.
Data sources and method: There were four data sets. First, there was a database of 777 ABOs that were open
after Midnight on most days. This was compiled by the Houston Police Department. Second, there was a
database of 1, 660 DWI crashes within the City of Houston, compiled by the Texas Department of Transportation
and verified by the Houston-Galveston Area Council. These crashes involved 170 fatalities, 91 incapacitating
injuries, 306 non-incapacitating injuries, 657 possible injuries as well as extensive property damage to the
vehicles. Third, there was a database of 6,856 DWI arrests occurring between Midnight and 6 am that was
collected by the Houston Police Department. Fourth, to relate late night ABOs to late night DWI crashes, both
data sets were assigned to 4,689 road segments from a modeling network. These road segments included all
major and minor roads but not neighborhood streets.
Results: The ABOs were highly concentrated. Outlet density was high compared to other places where it has been
documented, particularly in 16 small hot spots where the density was 238 ABOs per square mile. More than onethird of the crashes were within a quarter mile of an ABO. Based on an analysis of late night DWI arrests, the
majority of DWI trips were long; the average was 6.4 miles, the median was 4.5 miles, and 90% were longer than
0.5 miles (‘walking distance’).
Using the modeling network, a Poisson-Lognormal-CAR spatial regression model was set up that related the
number of late night DWI crashes per road segment to the number of late nights ABOs controlling for the size of
the segment (lane miles) and for the distance of the segment from downtown Houston. It was found that the
likelihood of a DWI crash substantially increased with each ABO located on the segment. Further, segments
without ABOs had a higher likelihood of a DWI crash the closer they were located to a late night ABO on another
segment.
Conclusion and Implications: The results are seen in a planning context of neighborhood deed restrictions in
Houston limiting the siting of late night ABOs and pushing them into area that are not restricted. The result is
that the ABOs are in high concentrations and far from where most of their patrons live. A preliminary working
hypothesis is that an implicit policy of deferring to neighborhood deed restrictions, while minimizing the effects
of alcohol-related crime and misdemeanors on local neighborhood, may be at the cost of putting a sizable
number of drunk drivers on the road. It is argued that more research is necessary to determine whether there
are better ABO allocation schemes that would reduce overall costs to the city and to its residents.
References
 Levine, N. (2009). “A motor vehicle safety planning support system: The Houston experience”. In S.
Geertman and J. Stillwell, Planning Support system: Best Practice and New Methods. Springer. 93-111.
 Levine, N. & Canter, P. ((2011). “Linking origins with destinations for DWI Motor Vehicle Crashes: An
application of crime travel demand modeling”. Crime Mapping, 3, 7-41.
 Campbell, C. A., Hahn, R. A., Elder, R., Brewer, R., Chattopadhyay, S., Fielding, J., Naimi, T. S., Toomey, T.,
Lawrence, B., Middleton, J. C.,& Task Force on Community Preventive Services (2009). The effectiveness
of limiting alcohol outlet density as a means of reducing excessive alcohol consumption and alcoholrelated harms. Am. J. Prev. Med., Dec 37 (6), 556-69
 Donnelly, N., Poynton, S., Weatherburn, D., Bamford, E., & Nottage, J. (2006). Liquor outlet
concentrations and alcohol-related neighbourhood problems. Alcohol Studies Bulletin (Vol. 8, pp. 15):
New South Wales. Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research.
 CADCA & CAMY (2011). Regulating Alcohol Outlet Density: An Action Guide. Community Anti-Drug
Coalitions of America and Center for Alcohol Marketing and Youth. Nov.
http://www.camy.org/action/Outlet_Density/_includes/Outlet%20Density%20Strategizer_Nov_2011.pd
f. Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore.

Abstract Index #: 705
DRIVER ATTITUDES ABOUT BICYCLISTS: NEGATIVE PERCEPTIONS OF RULE-FOLLOWING AND PREDICTABILITY
Abstract System ID#: 220
Individual Paper
GODDARD, Tara [Portland State University] goddard@pdx.edu, presenting author, primary author
MONSERE, Christopher [Portland State University] monsere@pdx.edu
DILL, Jennifer [Portland State University] jdill@pdx.edu
Existing research into the traffic safety of bicycling has focused on instrumental factors (e.g. intersection type,
motor vehicle speed) but few studies have probed the role of attitudes in interactions between drivers and
bicyclists. While attitudes feature prominently in current travel behavior research, the focus is primarily on their
effect on reasoned behaviors like mode choice, not on perceptions of fellow roadway users. Research has shown
that perceptions may be a function of mode, and people’s evaluations of the intentions and behavior of others
were the most negative when viewed from inside a car versus seen from a bus or walking. Other research has
indicated that drivers do not treat all bicyclists equally. Several studies have demonstrated differences in drivers’
overtaking distance of bicyclists depending on the gender, helmet use, or clothing of a bicyclist, but did not
examine drivers’ attitudes or perceptions directly. Most existing research on attitudes between drivers and
bicyclists relies on surveys of bicyclists; few data exist on driver attitudes.
The data presented in this paper are from a comprehensive evaluation of protected bike lanes in five large U.S.
cities (Austin, TX, Chicago, IL, Portland, OR, San Francisco, CA, and Washington, DC) that included survey
responses of 2,283 residents. Respondents answered questions about their travel behavior by each mode (car,
transit, bicycle, walking), their perception of the design of both hypothetical and existing street designs, and
demographics. Respondents were asked about the rule-following behavior and predictability of “people they
encounter in the street,” namely drivers, bicyclists, and pedestrians. These are the constructs of interest in the
present study.
Results showed that people who primarily commute by car are significantly more negative toward bicyclists than
toward other drivers. The majority of these respondents agree that drivers follow the rules of the road and are
predictable (67.6% and 69.7%, respectively), while only one-third agree that bicyclists follow the rules of the road
and are predictable (32.9% and 35.2%, respectively). People who make most of their non-commute trips by car
were even more positive toward their fellow drivers and negative toward bicyclists. Interestingly, while people
who commute primarily by bicycle were more balanced in their evaluations than car commuters, they were still
more likely to rate drivers as rule-following and predictable than bicyclists. There was a gender divergence on the
predictability construct: women were significantly more likely to disagree that bicyclists are predictable. For both
male and female car commuters, using a bicycle for some or all non-commute trips was associated with more
positive attitudes toward bicyclists, but the effect was significantly stronger for women. This suggested that
women’s attitudes toward bicyclists may be particularly affected by personal experience with bicycling. Overall,
the analysis revealed that respondents’ attitudes vary by mode, and even people who make some or most of
their trips by bicycle hold negative attitudes about bicyclists’ rule-following and predictability.
References
 Gatersleben, Birgitta, Niamh Murtagh, and Emma White. “Hoody, Goody or Buddy? How Travel Mode
Affects Social Perceptions in Urban Neighbourhoods.” Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology
and Behaviour 21 (November 2013): 219–30. doi:10.1016/j.trf.2013.09.005.
 Walker, I. “Drivers Overtaking Bicyclists: Objective Data on the Effects of Riding Position, Helmet Use,
Vehicle Type and Apparent Gender.” Accident Analysis & Prevention 39, no. 2 (March 2007).
http://trid.trb.org/view/2007/C/797825.
 Walker, Ian, Ian Garrard, and Felicity Jowitt. “The Influence of a Bicycle Commuter’s Appearance on
Drivers’ Overtaking Proximities: An on-Road Test of Bicyclist Stereotypes, High-Visibility Clothing and
Safety Aids in the United Kingdom.” Accident Analysis & Prevention 64 (March 2014): 69–77.
doi:10.1016/j.aap.2013.11.007.



Monsere, Chris, Jennifer Dill, Nathan McNeil, Kelly Clifton, Nick Foster, Tara Goddard, Matt Berkow, et
al. “Lessons From The Green Lanes: Evaluating Protected Bike Lanes In the U.S.,” June 2014.
http://trid.trb.org/view/2014/M/1312752.

Abstract Index #: 706
THE POSITIVE UTILITY OF TRAVEL: EXPLORING MECHANISMS, CHALLENGES, AND IMPLICATIONS
Abstract System ID#: 232
Individual Paper
SINGLETON, Patrick [Portland State University] patrick.singleton@pdx.edu, presenting author, primary author
CLIFTON, Kelly [Portland State University] kclifton@pdx.edu
Recent research has increasing acknowledged that traditional variables such as travel time, cost, traveler
socioeconomics, and the built environment cannot fully explain the complexities of observed travel behaviors,
especially mode choices. At the same time, there is renewed interest in representing a wider range of behavioral
influences on travel decision-making, including attitudes, perceptions, habits, and non-utility-maximizing choices,
using advanced travel analysis methods (Cherchi, 2009). With these issues in mind, we have developed a
conceptual framework of travel behavior (Singleton & Clifton, 2014) based on theoretical and empirical research
in the transportation, economics, geography, and psychology fields. The framework attempts to explain many of
the multiplex influences on individual, short-term travel behavior.
One of these behavioral complexities is the potential that travel is not solely a disutility to be minimized; there
may be a positive utility to traveling for some people in some situations. Empirical evidence suggests that travel
demand may not be completely derived from a demand for activities across space: some people like to travel
(Ory & Mokhtarian, 2005). Theoretically, the positive utility of travel could result from the utility of destination
activities, the utility of activities conducted during travel, and any intrinsic benefits of traveling (Mokhtarian &
Salomon, 2001). Others suggest that findings of a positive utility (or a negative value of travel time savings) might
be the result of unobserved travel experience factors, conjoint activities, non-linear responses to travel time, or
modeling assumptions (Hess, Bierlaire, & Polak, 2005). Because the (monetized) value of travel time savings is
crucial to cost-benefit analysis, failing to account for the positive utility of travel may result in overestimates of
the benefits accruing or the mode shifts resulting from mobility- and accessibility-enhancing transportation
projects. Planning for a future of autonomous vehicles and new information and communication technologies will
require a greater attention to the issues surrounding the positive utility of travel.
In this study, we apply our conceptual framework of travel behavior towards a greater understanding of the
causes and implications of the positive utility of travel. To this end, the most relevant sections of the framework
include representing: a) activities during travel; b) experiential factors like safety/security, cost (time,
unreliability), and especially pleasure (comfort, enjoyment); and c) preference variation across individuals. First,
we create a synthetic mode choice demonstration dataset with alternative, environment, and perceptual
attributes. Synthetic data are based on separate attitudinal and household travel survey data sources, all
collected in the Portland, Oregon, region. Next, we estimate discrete mode choice models on the synthetic data,
testing a variety of specifications related to: 1) different explanations of the positive utility of travel (activities,
experiences, taste heterogeneity, nonlinearities); and 2) different levels/intensities of data collection (revealed
preference travel surveys, augmented with attitudes, supplemented with stated preferences). Our first objective
is to document the challenges related to data collection and modeling when attempting to understand complex
relationships related to the positive utility of travel. Our second goal is to highlight the planning and forecasting
opportunities available if we were able to collect sufficient data and adequately represent and model the factors
that contribute to the positive utility of travel.
References
 Cherchi, E. (2009). Modelling individual preferences: State of the art, recent advances, and future
directions. Presented at the 12th International Conference on Travel Behavior Research, Jaipur, India.








Hess, S., Bierlaire, M., & Polak, J. W. (2005). Estimation of value of travel-time savings using mixed logit
models. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 39(2), 221–236. DOI:
10.1016/j.tra.2004.09.007
Mokhtarian, P. L., & Salomon, I. (2001). How derived is the demand for travel? Some conceptual and
measurement considerations. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 35(8), 695–719. DOI:
10.1016/S0965-8564(00)00013-6
Ory, D. T., & Mokhtarian, P. L. (2005). When is getting there half the fun? Modeling the liking for travel.
Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 39(2), 97–123. DOI: 10.1016/j.tra.2004.09.006
Singleton, P. A., & Clifton, K. J. (2014). The theory of travel decision-making: A conceptual framework of
active travel behavior. Presented at the 54th Annual Conference of the Association of Collegiate Schools
of Planning, Philadelphia, PA.

Abstract Index #: 707
THE  impact OF LRT AND NEIGHBORHOOD DESIGN ON AUTO OWNERSHIP AND USE: A QUASI-LONGITUDINAL
ANALYSIS OF MOVERS IN THE TWIN city
Abstract System ID#: 233
Individual Paper
CAO, Jason [Univ. of Minnesota] cao@umn.edu
Many regions in the U.S. have been promoting rapid transit program and corresponding transit-oriented
developments (TODs) to accommodate the increase in travel and slow the growth in congestion. Although
previous studies have produced empirical evidence on transit ridership benefits of transitways, few have
examined their  impact on auto ownership and auto use, which are directly related to congestion. This project
fills the gap. Specifically, using the data collected from five corridors in the Twin city in May 2011, I will apply
structural equations model to quantify the influences of the Hiawatha light rail transit (LRT) and neighborhood
characteristics on auto ownership and auto use of station area residents through quasi-longitudinal analyses. The
paper will answer the following questions: How do changes in neighborhood characteristics lead to the
reductions in auto ownership and auto use? Does the Hiawatha LRT affect auto ownership and auto use after
controlling neighborhood characteristics and confounding factors? How large are its  impact? This study will
provide robust evidence on the relationships among transit and associated development, auto ownership, and
auto use. The results are expected to offer critical knowledge in evaluating the role of rapid transit and TOD in
addressing transportation challenges.
References
 Chatman, Daniel G. 2013. "Does TOD Need the T? On the Importance of Factors Other Than Rail Access."
Journal of the American Planning Association 79(1):17-31.
 Krizek, Kevin J. 2003. "Residential Relocation and Changes in Urban Travel: Does Neighborhood-Scale
Urban Form Matter?" Journal of the American Planning Association 69(3):265-281.
 Potoglou, Dimitris and Pavlos S. Kanaroglou. 2008. "Modelling car ownership in urban area: a case
study of Hamilton, Canada." Journal of transportation Geography 16(1):42-54.
 Scheiner, Joachim and Christian Holz-Rau. 2013. "Changes in travel mode use after residential relocation:
a contribution to mobility biographies." Transportation 40(2):431-458.
 Van Acker, Veronique and Frank Witlox. 2010. "Car ownership as a mediating variable in car travel
behaviour research using a structural equation modelling approach to identify its dual relationship."
Journal of transportation Geography 18(1):65-74.

Abstract Index #: 708
BUILT ENVIRONMENT FACTORS IN EXPLAINING THE RISKS AND FREQUENCIES OF BICYCLE-VEHICLE CRASHES: A
SPATIAL STATISTIC APPROACH
Abstract System ID#: 241
Individual Paper

CHEN, Peng [University of Washington] chenp5@uw.edu
The objective of this study is to understand the relationship between built environment factors and bicyclevehicle crashes in Seattle employing the Poisson lognormal random effects model. The explanatory variables
include the factors of  land_use, road environment and traffic controls. The research questions are threefold: How
are the built environment factors associated with the risks and frequencies of bicycle-vehicle crashes? Are the
risks and frequencies of collisions spatially correlated? Can the theory of “safety in numbers” be an appropriate
reference in explaining the scale economy in cyclist volume in reducing cycling risks? The findings of this study
are: (1) Regulating speed limit is an effective strategy to reduce the risks and numbers of bicycle-vehicle crashes.
(2) “Safety in numbers” is evidenced by the negative relationship between cyclist volume and risks of bicyclevehicle crashes; also supportive effects from built environment elements are convinced through encouraging
dense urban development for a safer cycling environment. (3) Commercial, on-arterial bicycle routes and traffic
signals are correlated with higher propensities of bicycle-vehicle collisions. (4) The frequencies of bicycle-vehicle
collisions are spatially auto-correlated, while the crash risks are not. For policy indications, the results suggest
that complementary efforts, such as regulating speed limit and encouraging dense urban development, can
promote cycling environment safety.
References
 Bhatia, R., Wier, M., 2011. "Safety in numbers" re-examined: Can we make valid or practical inferences
from available evidence? Accident Analysis & Prevention 43 (1), 235-240.
 Lord, D., Mannering, F., 2010. The statistical analysis of crash-frequency data: A review and assessment
of methodological alternatives. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 44 (5), 291-305.
 Mannering, F.L., Bhat, C.R., 2014. Analytic methods in accident research: Methodological frontier and
future directions. Analytic Methods in Accident Research 1 (0), 1-22.
 Siddiqui, C., Abdel-Aty, M., Choi, K., 2012. Macroscopic spatial analysis of pedestrian and bicycle crashes.
Accident Analysis & Prevention 45 (0), 382-391.
 Wei, F., Lovegrove, G., 2012. An empirical tool to evaluate the safety of cyclists: Community based,
macro-level collision prediction models using negative binomial regression. Accident Analysis &
Prevention (0).

Abstract Index #: 709
CAPTURING LOYALTY: PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS, SERVICE QUALITY, CUSTOMER SATISFACTION, AND
BEHAVIORAL INTENTIONS IN PUBLIC TRANSIT
Abstract System ID#: 254
Individual Paper
VAN LIEROP, Dea [McGill University] dea.vanlierop@mail.mcgill.ca, presenting author, primary author
EL-GENEIDY, Ahmed [McGill University] ahmed.elgeneidy@mail.mcgill.ca
Public transit is a service that many city recognize as being an important aspect in the development of socially,
environmentally, and economically sustainable comminuty. Many city are developing policy that promote
walking, cycling, and public transit as viable alternatives to private motorized vehicles. Improving public transit as
a way to increase mode share has consequently become the focus of many transportation agencies and public
policy makers as they aim to develop more sustainable city. Nevertheless, current transit usage is still much
lower than automobile usage, and thus, novel strategies need to be developed to promote the use this
sustainable mode. One way to increase transit mode share and reduce reliance on the automobile is to attempt
to better understand how to maintain and increase ridership among existing transit users. Therefore, the
relationship between perceptions of transit service quality, customer satisfaction, and behavioral intentions has
recently been receiving much attention as transit agencies aim to identify ways to increase ridership.
Improvements in perceived service quality increase the attractiveness of the mode, and therefore lead to
growing patronage. With this in mind, the present paper examines how transit users’ personal characteristics,
perceptions of service quality, and overall user satisfaction influence loyalty. Using information from five years of

customer satisfaction questionnaires collected by two Canadian transit providers in Montreal, Quebec, and
Vancouver, British Columbia, this study attempts to better understand the complexities of the factors influencing
passenger satisfaction and behavioral intentions in these two city. The paper assesses factors such as perceived
comfort, safety, crowding, frequency, and cleanliness to understand overall perceived service quality. It explores
the relationships between transit users’ personal perceptions, service quality, satisfaction, and behavioral
intentions using a Structural Equation Model (SEM) approach. SEM is used to determine ways in which levels of
satisfaction can be increased in an attempt to understand how to maintain and increase ridership among exiting
transit users. This method uses latent variables to capture individuals’ underlying perceptions of service quality
and provides information about the relationships within the model. In addition, it is commonly accepted that
individuals’ perceptions of service quality and observed customer satisfaction affect passengers’ repeat
consumption or use of a product or service. Therefore, it is important to use a technique that can isolate the
different factors influencing satisfaction and thereby discover how and where transit agencies can make policy
changes to maintain or increase ridership levels. A series of models is developed to reflect the different groups
using transit in Montreal and Vancouver to better understand how personal characteristics influence passengers’
perceptions of service quality, and consequently how perceptions of service quality influence perceived overall
passenger satisfaction and behavioral intentions related to loyalty. Models account for differences in mode use,
vehicle ownership, and income. More specifically, in each city captive riders (users who are dependent on
transit), choice riders (car owners who choose to take transit), and captive-by-choice riders (users who are
dependent on transit but could own a car) are accounted for and modeled by mode use (bus, metro/Sky-train).
The findings from this study provide awareness into which factors transit agencies can focus on when developing
policies that aim to increase satisfaction and grow patronage among the different groups they are serving. Insight
into the perceptions of passengers using data from two geographically distinct settings provides useful
information that can help improve the understanding of perceptions of service quality in general and shows how
this understanding can be used to shape policy with the goal of increasing the use of public transit in other urban
regions.
References
 de Oña, J., de Oña, R., Eboli, L., & Mazzulla, G. (2013). Perceived service quality in bus transit service: A
structural equation approach. transportation Policy, 29, 219-226.
 Eboli, L., & Mazzulla, G. (2012). Structural equation modelling for analysing passengers’ perceptions
about railway services. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 54, 96-106.
 Minser, J., & Webb, V. (2010). Quantifying the Benefits: Application of customer loyalty modeling in
public transportation context. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research
Board, 2144(1), 111-120.
 Outwater, M., Castleberry, S., Shiftan, Y., Ben-Akiva, M., Shuang Zhou, Y., & Kuppam, A. (2003).
Attitudinal market segmentation approach to mode choice and ridership forecasting: Structural equation
modeling. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 1854(1), 3242.
 Stuart, K., Mednick, M., & Bockman, J. (2000). Structural equation model of customer satisfaction for the
New York City subway system. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research
Board, 1735(1), 133-137.

Abstract Index #: 710
SLIMMING THE STREETS: AN ANALYSIS OF THE BEFORE-AND-AFTER EFFECTS OF A ROAD DIET
Abstract System ID#: 266
Individual Paper
NIXON, Hilary [San Jose State University] hilary.nixon@sjsu.edu
The conversion of a four-lane undivided roadway to three-lanes with two through-travel lanes and a two-way
center left-turn lane has been recommended by the Federal Highway Administration as a low-cost means to
address safety concerns and create a more “community-focused, ‘Complete Streets’ environment” (Knapp et al.,
2014, 1). These so-called road diets have been shown to result in a number of benefits including:

•
•
•
•
•

Improved safety, including a reduction in crashes and speed (Knapp & Giese, 2001);
Reduced delay at intersections due to separate left turn lanes;
More consistent traffic flow;
Improved facilities for pedestrians and bicyclists, including easier roadway crossings (Zegeer et al., 2001),
and, when installed, dedicated bike lanes;
Improved quality of life (Rosales, 2006).

Road diets are not without concerns, however. Depending on the specific design, parking could be reduced
and/or access by delivery vehicles could lead to lane blockage. In addition, depending on the configuration of side
streets, some traffic may switch to nearby side roads thus increasing traffic congestion on roads less suited to
higher traffic volumes.
This research examines the before-and-after effects of the implementation of a road diet in San José, California.
In Spring 2015, the City of San José, in collaboration with local neighborhood organizations and business groups,
began a three-month road diet pilot program along an approximately 1-mile stretch of Lincoln Ave. in the Willow
Glen neighborhood of central San José. Lincoln Ave. runs through a predominantly residential neighborhood with
a small neighborhood business district. The street, a four-lane, undivided roadway, has become a popular route
for commuters avoiding the more congested nearby freeways and expressways. Close to 20,000 vehicles per day
travel along this route, often above posted speed limits, posing a risk to pedestrians and bicyclists. According to
data compiled by the Santa Clara County Department of Public Health (2014), vehicle-pedestrian injury collisions
are 63% higher in Willow Glen compared to the weighted average for other neighborhood in the county, vehiclebicycle injury collisions are 53% higher, and motor vehicle collisions are 69% higher.
Data on traffic counts, speeds, and turn movements was collected at 45 different locations several weeks prior to
the beginning of the road diet pilot to determine baseline traffic data. Next month, data will be collected at these
same locations in order to assess the effect of the pilot. According to John Brazil, manager of the Active
Transportation Program for the City of San José, this data collection effort is the most extensive undertaken by
the City for a roadway improvement of this type.
Despite the growing interest among transportation planners for the implementation of road diets, there is limited
empirical evidence that examines the effects of these roadway conversions. This research contributes to that
small, but growing body of literature by focusing on the effects of the road diet program with an emphasis on the
change in traffic counts and speed along the main arterial, Lincoln Ave., as well as the numerous side streets
running parallel and perpendicular to Lincoln. Due to the short-term nature of the pilot, it is unlikely that
sufficient crash data will be available for analysis.
References
 Knapp, Keith K, Brian Chandler, Jennifer Atkinson, Thomas M. Welch, Heather Rigdon, Richard Retting,
Stacy Meekins, Eric Widstrand and R. J. Porter. Road Diet Informational Guide. Washington, D.C.: Federal
Highway Administration, 2014.
 Gates, Tim J., David A Noyce, Vijay Talada and Loren Hill. "The Safety and Operational Effects of "Road
Diet" Conversions in Minnesota." Paper presented at the Transportation Research Board 86th Annual
Meeting. Washington, D.C., 2007.
 Ewing, R and E Dumbaugh. "The Built Environment and Traffic Safety: A Review of Empirical Evidence."
Journal of Planning Literature 23, no. 4 (2009): 347-367.
 Huang, Herman F, J Richard Stewart and Charles V Zegeer. "Evaluation of Lane Reduction "Road Diet"
Measures on Crashes and Injuries." Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation
Research Board 1784, no. 1 (2002): 80-90.
 Knapp, Keith K and Karen Giese. Guidelines for the Conversion of Urban Four-Lane Undivided Roadways
to Three-Lane Two-Way Left-Turn Lane Facilities. Ames, IA: Center for Transportation Research and
Education, Iowa State University, 2001.

Abstract Index #: 711
MEASURING AND VISUALIZING ACCESSIBILITY IN NAIROBI
Abstract System ID#: 268
Poster
CAMPBELL, Kayleigh [Columbia University] krc2104@columbia.edu, presenting author, primary author
RISING, James [Columbia University] jarising@gmail.com
KLOPP, Jacqueline [Columbia University] jmklopp@gmail.com
The goal of transportation is to provide people with access to a greater number of opportunities and interactions
with other people, services, jobs, and places. With that goal in mind, transportation planning is about more than
just mobility, or increasing the possible distance individuals can travel. It includes a focus on access, on increasing
the set of easily available opportunities a person has (UN Habitat, 2014). In developing regions where data are
limited or unavailable, there are very few empirical studies looking at access and even fewer that incorporate
paratransit (or informal) bus system. Without this data, it is hard to know how to suggest investments that
would improve accessibility. This study is the first to use detailed paratransit data to explore access in developing
countries, using a new dataset on Nairobi’s bus and matatu system (see note below).
We have three objectives for this research. First, we use multiple measures of access to understand how access is
spatially distributed across the highly unequal and socially segregated city of Nairobi. Second, we analyze how
results differ based on the measure chosen. Third, we compare these results to actual travel behavior to identify
potential limitations of using these measures.
A perfect measure of access would take into account land-use system, changes in the transportation service,
temporal constraints, and individual preferences (Fol & Gallez, 2014; Geurs & van Wee, 2004; Macário, 2014).
Because of the multi-faceted nature of access, there is no one metric that captures the full extent of accessibility,
and measures should be chosen based on the specific situation or question being asked. To determine where and
who has access we evaluate three different accessibility measures: contour measures, gravity measures, and
utility-based measures. These were chosen because they strike a balance between being simple enough to
interpret and use in practice while incorporating components of an ideal accessibility measure. For each of these
measures we create a heat map, a spatially explicit visual representation of the level of access that a person has
at any given location in Nairobi. Each map displays one of the three different accessibility measures. Taking
subsets of these maps, we highlight how accessibility varies by neighborhood and how it varies based on different
assumptions about the traveler’s age, ability to pay for transit, and car ownership. We also compare the maps to
each other to understand how access varies based on the specific metric used. Finally, we compare the results to
actual behavior from travel survey data. The discrepancy between the actual travel behavior and the level of
access that we measure allows us to identify potential barriers to access that are not being captured in the
metrics.
This project is the first empirical analysis of accessibility in Nairobi, and the first accessibility study to use detailed
data on paratransit. The project also focuses on finding helpful visual tools for a broader public to understand the
issue of access. Overall our findings contribute to the literature on how to measure and draw attention to
accessibility in a highly socially segregated city in the developing world where inequality has been embedded into
the spatial organization of the city’s infrastructure (Klopp, 2012). Comparing and evaluating different ways of
measuring accessibility is the first step in a larger research agenda meant to raise questions about how the spatial
distribution of infrastructure contributes to aspects of social cohesion and inequality.
Notes
See the Digital Matatus Project: www.digitalmatatus.com. A collaborative project of the University of Nairobi,
Columbia University’s Center for Sustainable Urban Development, MIT’s Civic Data Design Lab, and Groupshot.

References
 Fol, S., & Gallez, C. (2014). Social inequalities in urban access: better ways of assessing transport
improvements. In E. D. Sclar, M. Lönnroth, & C. Wolmar, Urban Access for the 21st Century: Finance and
Governance Models for transportation Infrastructure (pp. 46–86). New York: Routledge.
 Geurs, K. T., & van Wee, B. (2004). Accessibility evaluation of land-use and transportation strategies: review
and research directions. Journal of transportation Geography, 12(2), 127–140.
doi:10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2003.10.005
 Klopp, J. M. (2012). Towards a Political Economy of Transportation Policy and Practice in Nairobi. Urban
Forum, 23(1), 1–21. doi:10.1007/s12132-011-9116-y
 Macário, R. (2014). Access as a social good and as an economic good. In E. D. Sclar, M. Lönnroth, & C.
Wolmar, Urban Access for the 21st Century: Finance and Governance Models for Transport
Infrastructure (pp. 87–117). New York: Routledge.
 UN Habitat. (2014). Global Report on Human Settlements 2013: Planning and Design for Sustainable
Urban Mobility. UN.

Abstract Index #: 712
AIR QUALITY, ELECTRIC VEHICLES AND THE MOTORCYCLE CITY
Abstract System ID#: 277
Individual Paper
GUERRA, Erick [University of Pennsylvania] erickg@design.upenn.edu
A number of city, particularly in Southeast Asia, have adopted the motorcycle as the primary means of urban
transportation. Relatively high, but flat population and job densities, combined with a fairly uniformly distributed
road network and often narrow streets, make the motorcycle a convenient choice for point-to-point travel in
many city. Low-cost Chinese motorcycles, credit, and often subsidized gasoline make it an affordable choice as
well. Despite the perceptions of motorcycling as a high-risk activity in the US, low speeds and great numbers of
motorcyclists and bicyclists in motorcycle city combine to produce fairly low collision-related fatality rates,
when compared to city of similar size and wealth that rely more on private cars and informal transit. They are
also extremely efficient from a system, as well as an individual user’s perspective because they consume far less
roadway and can maneuver more flexibly than cars. Narrow arterial roads frequently carry as many people per
lane in motorcycle city as superhighways in American ones. Even in highly congested conditions, streets filled
with motorcycle tend to maintain vehicle flow instead of coming to the bumper-to-bumper halt that is familiar to
most car drivers and bus passengers.
Despite these advantages, a heavy reliance on motorcycles has a several disadvantages. Most notably,
inexpensive motorcycles operating on often adulterated gasoline produce high levels of local pollution, which
reduces life expectancy and cause harmful respiratory diseases particularly for the young and elderly. In many
countries like Indonesia, reliance on gasoline for personal travel makes it difficult to reduce or remove expensive
and economically distorting fuel subsidies.
This project proposes to evaluate the extent to which electric motorcycles or e-bikes are a potential replacement
for gasoline-powered motorcycles and at what price points, consumers are willing to adopt them in Solo,
Indonesia. Solo, Indonesia, is a Javanese city of 500,000 and is a quintessential motorcycle city. Between 2006
and 2011, the fleet of registered motorcycles grew 60% from 170,000 to 270,000. Two thirds of trips are by
motorcycle and origins and destinations are dispersed throughout the city. Even during peak time periods on
major corridors less than 10% of travelers use public transit, and 80% of these are on large regional buses, not
local ones.
To evaluate the relative importance of the price, speed, range, and charging times of electric vehicles to
consumers, I will develop a joint stated- and –revealed preference (RPSP) survey. Researchers commonly apply
RPSP surveys to estimate the potential market-penetration of new products or the probability that households
will use a new transportation investment (Train and Wilson 2008; Ben-Akiva et al. 1994). Brownstown, Bunch,

and Train (2000) used an RPSP survey to estimate the potential market for alternative fuel cars in California. The
combination of revealed preference and stated preference data lets researchers benefit from introducing new
alternative choices (such as electric motorcycles), but to temper some of the unreliability of stated preferences
by scaling and correlating them with actual revealed preferences (such as existing motorcycles). By allowing for
multiple responses to several alternative sets of choices, joint RPSP can also provide a panel with which to
estimate and control for individual-specific tastes and preferences.
References
 Ben-Akiva, M., M. Bradley, T. Morikawa, J. Benjamin, T. Novak, H. Oppewal, and V. Rao. 1994.
“Combining Revealed and Stated Preferences Data.” Marketing Letters 5 (4): 335–49.
 Brownstone, David, David S. Bunch, and Kenneth Train. 2000. “Joint Mixed Logit Models of Stated and
Revealed Preferences for Alternative-Fuel Vehicles.” Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 34
(5): 315–38. doi:10.1016/S0191-2615(99)00031-4.
 Rifai, A, Erick Guerra, Michael Haggery, and John Taylor. 2011. Informal Transportation Networks in
Three Indonesian city. city Development Initiative for Asia. http://cdia.asia/2012/05/02/informalpublic-transportation-networks-in-three-indonesian-cities/.
 Train, Kenneth, and Wesley W. Wilson. 2008. “Estimation on Stated-Preference Experiments
Constructed from Revealed-Preference Choices.” Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 42 (3):
191–203. doi:10.1016/j.trb.2007.04.012.

Abstract Index #: 713
STUDENT TRAVEL: ANALYSIS OF BUILT ENVIRONMENT AFFECTING MODE CHOICE IN 13 DIVERSE REGIONS OF
THE UNITED STATES
Abstract System ID#: 291
Individual Paper
TIAN, Guang [University of Utah] tianskyge@gmail.com, presenting author, primary author
EWING, Reid [University of Utah] ewing@arch.utah.edu
According to the most recent 2009 National Household Travel Survey (NHTS), 9.6% of students between the ages
of 5 and 15 walked to or from school, and 1.1% biked. In 1969, at the time of the first Nationwide Personal
Transportation Survey (predecessor to NHTS), 48% of students walked or biked to school (Ewing et al. 2004). 90%
of children living within one mile of school walked or biked there compared to about 31% today (Schlossberg et
al. 2006). Why the decline in walking and biking to school? environment characteristics of the neighborhood,
environmental and policy characteristics of the school, and characteristics of parents and children are reported
related with walking and biking to school (Ahlport et al. 2008; CDC, 2002; Ewing et al. 2004).
In this study, we will examine the relationship between mode of travel to school and the full range of built
environment and sociodemographic characteristics that might affect mode choice based on 13 diverse regions of
the United States. The regions are diverse as Boston and Portland at one end of the urban form continuum and
Houston and Kansas City at the other. To our knowledge, this is the largest sample of student travel records ever
assembled for such a study outside the NHTS. And relative to NHTS, this database provides much larger samples
for individual regions and permits the calculation of a wide array of built environment variables based on the
precise location of households and schools. NHTS provides geocodes (identifies households and schools) only at
the census tract level. For built environment, all D variables of built environment from Ewing and Cervero (2010)
– density, diversity, design, distance to transit, destination accessibility, and demographics – are consistently
defined and measured across regions. With more than 40,000 school trips in the 13 regions, a multinomial logit
model will be estimated to explain school mode choice for a sample of K–12 students.
The results of this study will provide knowledge of student travel behavior for policy makers and planning
practitioners to promote more students walking and biking to school, which could benefit both students’ health
and regional air quality.

References
 Ahlport, K. N., Linnan, L., Vaughn, A., Evenson, K. R., & Ward, D. S. (2008). Barriers to and facilitators of
walking and bicycling to school: formative results from the non-motorized travel study. Health Education
& Behavior, 35(2), 221-244.
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2002). Barriers to children walking and biking to
school--United States, 1999. MMWR. Morbidity and mortality weekly report, 51(32), 701.
 Ewing, R., & Cervero, R. (2010). Travel and the built environment: a meta-analysis. Journal of the
American planning association, 76(3), 265–294. doi: 10.1080/01944361003766766
 Ewing, R., Schroeer, W., & Greene, W. (2004). School location and student travel analysis of factors
affecting mode choice. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,
1895(1), 55–63. doi: 10.3141/1895-08
 Schlossberg, M., Greene, J., Phillips, P. P., Johnson, B., & Parker, B. (2006). School trips: effects of urban
form and distance on travel mode. Journal of the American Planning Association, 72(3), 337-346. doi:
10.1080/01944360608976755

Abstract Index #: 714
URBAN INEQUALITY IN ACCESSIBILITY TO AMENITIES AND EXPOSURE TO HAZARDS: THE LOCATION, ACTIVITY,
AND environment EXPOSURE (LAEX) FRAMEWORK
Abstract System ID#: 302
Individual Paper
YANG, Dongwoo [University of California, Irvine] dongwooy@uci.edu
This study examines how time-location activity patterns influence exposure to health-related built environment
and its implications to  land_use planning, urban form, and public-transit and non-motorized transportation
planning. It examines individual people’s geographic patterns and explores how this influences the utilization of
urban spaces, especially their activity patterns, travel behaviors, and exposure to amenities and hazards. This
essay aims at providing a heuristic theoretical framework on environment health. The framework consists of the
four main factors, including1) external factors, 2) behavioral level, 3) environment factors, and 4) health
outcomes. In addition to the theoretical framework, another purpose of the essay is to test the framework in
more advanced methodology in estimating individual activity spaces using individualized geographic data rather
than using aggregated geographic residential area, such as Census tracts, Census blocks, and so on.
This study uses two different methods to estimate location activity spaces, such as 1-standard deviation ellipse
(SDE1) and activity space path (ASP), and finds that accessibility and exposure levels are generally similar except
for some measurements. It uses Global Positioning System (GPS) driven travel behavior data obtained from
residents living around the EXPO light rail line in Los Angeles. For built environment qualities, the study
measures non-residential  land_use, employment density, street connectivity, block size, public transit density, air
pollution concentration, and polluting company density within individual residents' time-activity spaces. For the
percent of non-residential  land_use, public transit group shows higher percent of non-residential  land_use within
activity space, whereas non-public transit group shows higher percent within ASP. In terms of grocery density, car
owner group shows a higher density within SDE1 activity space, whereas non-car owner group has higher density
within their ASPs. The same pattern can be shown in polluting industry density. The density of polluting
companies within SDE1 was higher in car owner group than non-car owner group. However, the polluting
industry density within ASPs was higher in non-car owner group than car owner group.
From the empirical evidence supporting that an individual's lower socioeconomic status is linked to lower
environmental quality in which the person spends most time, This study suggests that institutional factors can
contribute to alleviating or exacerbating the inequality. Mixed-income and transit-oriented development would
help people to increase accessibility to amenities and reduce time to travel which can increase possibility to
exposure to air pollution generated from automobiles. However, the smart growth strategies need to be
implemented with more considerations on how to achieve some policy goals without conflicting in practical ways.
Most mixed-use developments provide limited number of residential options to lower SES group, and some

transit-oriented developments are adjacent to major traffic corridors. Since this research doesn't examine the
actual effect of institutional factors on location activity spaces and health-related behaviors, the institutional
factors and activity space and environment health will be tested for the future research.
References
 Haggerstrand, T. (1970). What About People in Regional Science? Ninth European Congress of the
Regional Science Association.
 Miller, R. (1982). Household Activity Patterns in Suburbs: A Time-Geographic Exploration, 72(3), 355–
371.
 Kwan, M., & Hong, X. (1998). Network-based Constraints-oriented Choice Set Formation using GIS.
Journal of Geographical system, 5, 139–162
 Kim, H.-M., & Kwan, M.-P. (2003). Space-time accessibility measures: A geocomputational algorithm
with a focus on the feasible opportunity set and possible activity duration. Journal of Geographical
Systems, 5(1), 71–91
 Houston, D., Basolo, V., & Yang, D. (2012). Walkability, Transit Access, and Traffic Exposure for LowIncome Residents With Subsidized Housing. American Journal of Public Health, August, 1–6.
doi:10.2105/AJPH.2012.300734

Abstract Index #: 715
CRASH SEVERITY AS FUNCTION OF DRIVER DEMOGRAPHICS, BUILT ENVIRONMENT, AND ROAD CONDITIONS: A
LOGIT MODELING APPROACH
Abstract System ID#: 298
Individual Paper
LEE, Dongkwan [The Ohio State University] lee.3018@osu.edu, presenting author, primary author
GULDMANN, Jean-Michel [The Ohio State University] guldmann.1@osu.edu
VON RABENAU, Burkhard [Ohio State University] vrabenau@qn.net
This study uses a logit model to explain crash severity based on (1) the gender and age of at-fault drivers, (2) the
surrounding built environment, and (3) road conditions. The model is estimated for the Central Ohio Region using
multiple files of the Ohio Department of Public Safety data base for the years 2006-2011 together with TAZ
(Traffic Analysis Zone) data on the built environment and socio-economic characteristics of the surrounding
population. The unit of analysis is the individual crash. This approach adds much detail to the factors that
influence crash severity, which cannot be captured in more aggregated approaches such as attributes of the
accidents location, vehicle and road features, weather conditions, and time of day. The logit model is used to
explain the probability of a bodily-injury (BI) crash, including fatality, with the alternative being a propertydamage crash. Because the age of the at-fault driver is a continuous independent variable, it is possible to
precisely assess the impact of age, for both male and female drivers. The results show that there is a significant
relationship between the probability of a BI crash and drivers’ behavior, built environment, driving conditions,
and driving situation. The policy implications of the results are discussed.
References
 Clifton, K. J., Burnier, C. V., and Akar, G. (2009). Severity of injury resulting from pedestrian–vehicle
crashes: What can we learn from examining the built environment? Transportation Research Part D,
Vol.14: 425-436.
 Dumbaugh and Zhang (2013). The Relationship Between Community Design and Crashes Involving Older
Drivers and Pedestrians, Journal of Planning and Education and Research, 33(1), 83-95.
 Hanson, C. S., Noland, R. B., and Brown C. (2013). The severity of pedestrian crashes: an analysis using
Google Street View imagery. Journal of transportation Geography, Vol. 33: 42-53.
 Kim et al. (2010). Accident and accessibility: measuring influences of demographic and  land_use variables
in Honolulu, Hawaii, Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2147, 9-17.
 Pulugurtha, S. S., Duddu, V. R., and Kotagiri, Y. (2012). Traffic analysis zone level crash estimation models
based on  land_use characteristics. Accident Analysis and Prevention, Vol. 50: 678-87.

Abstract Index #: 716
REGIONAL SAFETY PLANNING IN THE GREATER HOUSTON AREA
Abstract System ID#: 312
Pre-organized Session: Traffic Safety Planning
KAUFMAN, Jeff [Houston-Galveston Area Council] jeff.kaufman@h-gac.com
The Greater Houston area, with an estimated population of 6.2 million people, is wrestling with a traffic safety
epidemic. In 2014, the area experienced over 129,000 serious motor vehicle crashes, resulting in 603 fatalities
and nearly 18,000 serious injuries. This represents a 9.4 percent increase in deaths and a 20.9 percent increase in
serious injuries from 2011. With an additional 3 million residents expected over the next 25 years, the potential
for fatality and serious-injury growth increases.
With the adoption of The Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act (MAP-21), metropolitan planning
organizations (MPOs) will be required, in coordination with their State DOT, to establish a set of safety
performance targets either supporting the State DOT's targets or a target unique to the metropolitan area in
question. State DOTs have been addressing traffic safety for years. However, very few MPOs have established
safety program nor the resources to run such program.
The Houston-Galveston Area Council (H-GAC), the MPO for the greater Houston area, has been conducting
regional traffic safety planning for nearly 15 years. Beginning as a GIS-based crash-mapping exercise, H-GAC's
program has worked to engage representatives from various disciplines, including engineering, law enforcement,
health care, advocacy, research, and policy, to develop solutions for addressing the traffic safety problem in the
region. Working under the guidance of a Regional Safety Council, H-GAC’s program has conducted a variety of
activities:
•
•

•
•

•

Staff provides assistance to regional comminuty and interested entities in conducting crash analyses
ranging from focus-area assessments (such as drunk driving and young drivers) to location assessments.
In conjunction with the Houston Police Department and Texas Pictures, H-GAC commissioned the
development of a Telly-winning DWI documentary, Chronicles of a Teen Killer, which was geared
towards high school students to show the dangers and ramifications of drunk driving.
Staff, in partnership with Texas Children’s Hospital, conducted a large-scale outreach campaign on child
booster seat safety to over 300,000 area families
H-GAC, with permission from the Federal Motor Carriers Safety Administration (FMCSA), implemented
the FMCSA’s NO ZONE Campaign in the region, which involved a enhancement to the NO ZONE warning
graphic to allow for viewing at a greater distance of unsafe area around a truck, along with the
installation of 1,000 2’x4’ warning decals on trucks throughout the region.
H-GAC, through a grant with the Texas Department of Transportation, has been operating a multiagency Regional DWI Task Force consisting of 17 law enforcement agencies, the only formal multiagency approach in the State.

Through partnerships, innovation, and creativity, H-GAC has helped to maintain the traffic safety conversation as
a priority issue in the region.
This presentation will provide an overview of how H-GAC and the greater Houston region have worked to address
its traffic safety problems. It will provide a brief history of the Program, examples of engagement with
stakeholders, an overview of approaches H-GAC has taken to address traffic safety.
References
 Kaufman, J. (July 2008). “Creating a Safer Houston through Crash Mapping,” Geography and Public
Safety, Vol 1, Issue 2, National Institute of Justice
http://www.nij.gov/topics/technology/maps/documents/gps-bulletin-v1i2.pdf









AASHTO (2011) Strategic Highway Safety Plan Peer Exchange, Final Report, Prepared for NCHRP,
http://www.nasemso.org/Projects/HITS/documents/2011SHSPPeerExchangeFinalReportFINAL9_8_11.p
df
Southeast Michigan Council of Governments (1997). SEMCOG Traffic Safety Manual.
http://www.semcog.org/Plans-for-the-Region/Transportation/Safety#70260-traffic-safety-manual
http://www.semcog.org/Plans-for-the-Region/Transportation/Safety#70260-traffic-safety-manual
Ned Levine (2006). “Houston, Texas, Metropolitan Traffic Safety Planning Program”. Transportation
Research Record, 1969, 92-100. Abstract at
http://trb.metapress.com/content/w121m242h305754u/?p=32213996ae4348b0bf8edacdc8652955&pi
=4
FHWA (2015). Transportation Safety Planning (TSP). Office of Safety program, Federal Highway
Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation: Washington, DC. http://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/tsp/

Abstract Index #: 717
WHAT DETERMINES TRAVEL DEMAND BY BUS IN THE UNITED STATES? A NATIONAL STUDY AT MSA LEVEL
Abstract System ID#: 324
Individual Paper
ZHANG, Qiong [University of Toledo] qiong.zhang0318@gmail.com, presenting author
ALAM, Bhuiyan [University of Toledo] bhuiyan.alam@utoledo.edu, primary author
NIXON, Hilary [San Jose State University] hilary.nixon@sjsu.edu
Although the demand for travel by transit in the United States has historically been low, it is generally believed
that factors such as increasing gas price over the last decade compelled many auto drivers to switch to transit. It
is important for transit policy makers, planners, managers, and operators to understand the nature of
determining factors for transit demand so they can make informed policy and take necessary actions to provide
efficient transit system. Hence, there is a need for a study that analyzes transit travel demand in recent time.
This study attempts to do so by investigating the factors determining transit travel demand by bus within US
Metropolitan Statistical area (MSA) in 2010. It examines the  impact of both internal and external factors on
transit travel demand. Broadly, it analyzes the relationships among physical environment, socioeconomic
environment, transit system characteristics, and transit travel demand. External factors are those that transit
managers and operators cannot exercise their control over such as population density. Unlike external factors,
internal factors are system-specific that transit managers and operators can adjust and control such as fare,
operating hours, headways, etc.
The authors collected data on all 358 MSAs nationwide. The data mostly come from two sources: the U.S. Census
Bureau and Integrated National Transit Database Analysis System. Using data from these two sources, the
authors constructed several additional variables as well. For instance, transit coverage is measured as the ratio of
MSA population to route miles, while transit fare is measured as the ratio of fare revenue to passenger trips.
While gas price data was drawn from a public website (GasBuddy.com), MSI was calculated based on the
procedures shown by Ewing et al. (2003). Transit orientation patterns of the MSAs were estimated by both
telephone interviews of the transit managers and visual inspection of the transit network of each individual
system.
Initial data analysis indicated presence of non-normality, non-linearity and heteroscedasticity among the
variables. To address these issues, the authors transformed all continuous variables to natural logarithm, while
keeping three dummy variables untransformed. Tolerance and Variance Inflation Factor values indicate presence
of no collinearity among the predictors. Results indicate that while seven out of eight internal variables were
found to cause significant  impact on transit travel demand by bus, only five out of ten external variables were
significant predictors. The significant internal predictors are availability of rail transit, transit supply, transit fare,
revenue hours, average headway, transit safety, and transit coverage. Among the external factors, percentage of
African American population, percentage of carless households, vehicles per household, percentage of college

population, and percentage of immigrant population proved to be significant predictors. Unlike popular belief,
gas price did not come out as a significant explanatory variable of travel demand by bus.
Because this is a comprehensive study that includes all MSAs in the country, the significance of its findings is
worth mentioning. Since the internal factors are predominantly the significant predictors of transit travel demand
by bus mode, it is probably safe to argue that the managers and operators can decide on the quantity and quality
of transit services they will be able and willing to supply to the taxpayers without depending on outside factors.
In other words, they can increase transit ridership by adjusting few significant factors that are specific to their
transit system for which they do not need to depend on the outside world. Keeping this in mind, the transit
policy makers and planners may make appropriate plans and policy that will help transit authorities provide
efficient transit system to its users.
References
 Alam, Bhuiyan M. 2009. “Transit Accessibility to Jobs and Employment Prospects of Welfare Recipients
Without Cars.” Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board 2110: 78–
86.
 Brown, Jeffrey R., and Gregory L. Thompson. 2012. “Should Transit Serve the CBD or a Diverse Array of
Destinations? A Case Study Comparison of Two Transit system.” Journal of Public Transportation 15 (1).
 Ewing, Reid, Rolf Pendall, and Don Chen.2003. “Measuring Sprawl and Its Impact.” Smart Growth
America. Available from:
http://www.smartgrowthamerica.org/documents/MeasuringSprawlTechnical.pdf
 Taylor, Brian D., Douglas Miller, Hiroyuki Iseki, and Camille Fink. 2009. “Nature and/or Nurture?
Analyzing the Determinants of Transit Ridership across US Urbanized area.” Transportation Research
Part A: Policy and Practice 43 (1): 60–77.
 Thompson, Gregory L., and Jeffrey Brown. 2006. “Explaining Variation in Transit Ridership in U.S.
Metropolitan area between 1990 and 2000: Multivariate Analysis.” Transportation Research Record
1986 (1): 172–181.

Abstract Index #: 718
SHARED AUTOMATED VEHICLES AND TRANSIT: AN AGENT BASED COMPARISON OF SCENARIOS
Abstract System ID#: 325
Individual Paper
MERLIN, Louis [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] louismerlin@gmail.com
Purpose and Need
Shared automated vehicles, sometimes referred to as “automated taxis”, have been hypothesized as the
transport mode of the future. Such automated taxis would enable travelers to have point to point travel on
demand without requiring users to own their own vehicle. As such, shared automated vehicles could offer a new
form of transit with a unique set of benefits and challenges.
In particular, it has been shown that approximately 1 shared automated vehicle could replace about 10 owned
vehicles currently on the roadways (Fagnant & Kockelman, 2014). Other research has shown that shared
automated vehicles could potentially save significant time and money when deployed within denser urbanized
areas (Ballantyne et al., 2014; Burns, Jordan, & Scarborough, 2013).
This proposed new mode has been viewed by some as a potential replacement for transit. However, the
replacement of transit with shared automated vehicles could result in increased congestion, particularly during
peak periods, and also possibly higher transportation energy use. Analysis has also shown that shared automated
vehicles could not readily duplicate the high capacity of current transit system (i.e. buses and trains).

Alternatively, shared automated vehicles could serve as feeders for transit, extending the geographic scope of
transit system and boosting transit ridership. These two divergent perspective demonstrate the uncertainty
which surrounds how the introduction of automated vehicles might affect future transit operations.
Research Question
How can automated vehicles be integrated with existing transit services to improve their level of service as well
as their sustainability performance? Current transit system operate on fixed schedules and cannot readily adapt
to variation in demand over time and space. On the other hand, current transit system are likely better able to
deal with concentrated peak hour flows than a system of shared automated vehicles alone. Ideally, the best
features of existing transit and shared automated vehicles could be intelligently integrated into a new system
which takes advantage of the strongest features of each.
This project will build a series of agent-based simulations of travel behavior in Ann Arbor and its surroundings.
Such agent-based simulations will track the travel behavior of individual agents from point to point with a high
level of dynamic detail (i.e. in minutes). Three scenarios will be compared, one with current transit patterns, one
with transit travel replaced by shared automated vehicles, and one with a hybrid of transit and shared automated
vehicles. For each of these scenarios, the mobility performance and the sustainability performance will be
analyzed with data created from the simulations.
Mobility performance will be evaluated based on average and worst case (95%) wait and travel times for
passengers. The sustainability performance of each system will be measured by energy use, vehicle miles
traveled, and levels of traffic congestion.
Expected Findings
- Shared automated vehicles without transit would result in unacceptable levels of congestion during peak
periods.
- Transit without shared automated vehicles would result in unnecessary energy use during off-peak periods and
poor level of service for trips to some parts of the service area.
- Shared automated vehicles in conjunction with transit would result in reduced wait times, reduced travel times,
and lower energy use, without worsening congestion.
Implications
The results of this research may be used by future transit agencies and car share companies to identify ways to
adapt their operations as automated vehicles become available. Additionally, by highlighting the potential
benefits of shared automated vehicles, this research should add to the evidence that a future transportation
system based on vehicle sharing has significant sustainability benefits over a system centered on vehicle
ownership alone. It is hoped that this research lends support to policy and institutions which are working on
promoting shared mobility services.
References
 Fagnant, D. J., & Kockelman, K. M. (2014). Development and Application of a Network-Based Shared
Automated Vehicle Model in Austin, Texas. In Transportation Research Board Conference on Innovations
in Travel Modeling (p. 15).
 Burns, L. D., Jordan, W. C., & Scarborough, B. A. (2013). Transforming Personal Mobility. New York, N.Y.
 Ballantyne, K., Zhang, R., Morton, D., Pavone, M., Case, S. A., Spieser, K. Frazzoli, E. (2014). Toward a
Systematic Approach to the Design and Evaluation of Automated Mobility-on-Demand system : A Case
Study in Singapore (pp. 0–16). Retrieved from http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/82904
 Kornhauser, A. (2013). Uncongested Mobility for All: New Jersey’s Area Wide aTaxi System (p. 62).
 Fagnant, D. J., & Kockelman, K. M. (2014). The travel and environment implications of shared
autonomous vehicles, using agent-based model scenarios. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies, 40, 1–13. doi:10.1016/j.trc.2013.12.001

Abstract Index #: 719
UNRAVELING WAREHOUSING DECENTRALIZATION TRENDS IN U.S. METROPOLITAN area
Abstract System ID#: 340
Individual Paper
KANG, Sanggyun [University of Southern California] sanggyuk@usc.edu
This paper examines warehousing and distribution center (W/DC) decentralization. W/DC decentralization is an
important planning issue. It is argued that in seeking more efficient and larger-scale operation, W/DCs are moving
to the urban periphery, trading off transportation costs and access to market and labor for lower land costs. While
decentralization may lead to lower costs for freight distribution, greater distance from population centers may
lead to increased freight vehicle miles traveled and their associated externalities.
Is there a consistent trend of W/DC decentralization? Only a few researchers have investigated this issue, and
results vary depending on the study area or methodology. Existing literature is either geographically limited or
uses rudimentary indicators of decentralization. An expansion of warehousing activities and associated W/DC
decentralization have been documented in major metropolitan area – Los Angeles, Atlanta, and Paris (Dablanc
and Ross, 2012; Dablanc, et al., 2014). These studies used centrography point pattern analysis and documented
W/DC decentralization and polarization in Atlanta 1998-2008 and in Los Angeles 1998-2009. Cidell (2010) used
Gini coefficients and observed not only decentralization in US metropolitan area, but also rather complex
processes of freight  land_use adjustments in 1986-2005. In Seattle, W/DC concentration has been documented,
attributed to growth management policy (Dablanc, et al., 2014). The authors surmise that W/DC decentralization
may occur only in very large metropolitan area, in which functions of major trade nodes and major consumer
markets coexist.
I document recent trends in W/DC location and decentralization in US metropolitan area 2003-2012 and test
multiple measures of spatial change. Even if W/DCs are decentralizing, the question is whether they are
decentralizing more than the population and employment distributions they serve. Thus simple measures of
spatial shifts with respect to the city center may be inadequate. Moreover, it is not clear that even if W/DCs are
decentralizing more than population and employment, truck VMT must increase. Documenting whether there is
a consistent trend of W/DC decentralization is a first step in determining the extent to which decentralization
may be a problem worthy of policy intervention.
I define and test spatial structure indicators of W/DC distribution using zip-code level employment data. The
complication is that W/DCs are not standalone facilities, but strategically located along freight corridors in
consideration of land and transportation costs, access to market, labor, and freight nodes. No single measure can fully
describe W/DC distribution. Rather, a measure which considers distribution of market proxies – population and
employment – is necessary. I present three measures of spatial structure to quantify W/DC distribution:
centrality, concentration, and relative distribution. The two former measures quantify W/DC distribution itself
(Anas, et al., 1998). Centrality measures the degree to which an urban activity is concentrated with respect to the
CBD: W/DCs can be either centralized or decentralized. Concentration measures the degree to which an urban
activity is clustered in several locations: W/DCs can be strategically clustered around major freight nodes or
dispersed throughout the metropolitan area (Galster et al. 2001). In California, Los Angeles was the only place
with substantial increase (13%) in one of the centrality measures – distance to CBD, whereas San Francisco (-2%),
Sacramento (3%) and San Diego (0%) showed decrease or trivial increases. The latter – relative distribution –
considers decentralization of market proxies and quantifies relative distances to them. The use of multi-faceted
measures is well-suited to the analysis of W/DC decentralization in that it consistently quantifies the spatial
structures of W/DCs in response to distribution of relevant activities in a simple manner. The result varies
depending on the role and extent to which each metropolitan area is involved in global goods trade networks.
Possible explanations for differentiated estimates are discussed.
References
 Anas, Alex, R. Arnott, and K. A. Small. 1998. Urban Spatial Structure. Journal of Economic Literature,
36:1426-1464.







Cidell, Julie. 2010. Concentration and decentralization: the new geography of freight distribution in US
metropolitan area. Journal of transportation Geography, 18 (3): 363-371.
Dablanc, Laetitia, and Catherine Ross. 2012. Atlanta: a mega logistics center in the Piedmont Atlantic
Megaregion (PAM). Journal of transportation Geography, 24: 432-442.
Dablanc, Laetitia, Scott Ogilvie, and Anne Goodchild. 2014. Logistics sprawl: Differential warehousing
development patterns in Los Angeles, California, and Seattle, Washington. TRB, Transportation Research
Record (TRR), 17p.
Galster, George, Royce Hanson, Michael R. Ratcliffe, Harold Wolman, Stephen Coleman, and Jason
Freihage. 2001. Wrestling sprawl to the ground: Defining and measuring an elusive concept. Housing
Policy Debate, 12 (4):681-717.

Abstract Index #: 720
USING FACILITY DEMAND MODELS TO ASSESS EXPOSURE TO HAZARDS: NON-MOTORIZED TRAFFIC,
ACCIDENTS, AND AIR POLLUTION
Abstract System ID#: 344
Individual Paper
HANKEY, Steve [Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State University] hankey@vt.edu, presenting author, primary
author
LINDSEY, Greg [University of Minnesota] linds301@umn.edu
Recent research has expanded our knowledge of how non-motorized traffic flows on transportation networks. As
efforts to encourage bicycle and pedestrian traffic grows, planners are striving to address exposure to hazards
(e.g., traffic accidents or air pollution) that may partially offset the public health benefits associated with nonmotorized travel. One class of models that may help to assess patterns of exposure to hazards are facility demand
models. A key advantage of facility demand models is their capability to make spatially-resolved (i.e., <100 meter)
estimates of bicycle and pedestrian traffic (based on carefully selected non-motorized traffic count locations). In
this paper, we build on previous facility demand models in Minneapolis, MN by using a modeling approach that
employs network buffers to calculate predictor variables while also allowing for varying geographic scales for
each predictor variable. Additionally, we include recently developed employment accessibility metrics in our
models that were specifically designed for cyclists and pedestrians. We illustrate how facility demand models for
bicycle and pedestrian traffic can be used as a critical input in the planning process. Specifically, we show how
combining spatial data of (1) bicycle-vehicle crashes, (2) air pollution concentrations, and (3) facility demand
model-based estimates of non-motorized traffic volumes can lead to better planning decisions. For example, we
identify locations that have high crash counts (i.e., total crashes) as well as high crash rates (i.e., crash count /
non-motorized traffic volume) to prioritize sites for design interventions. Similarly, locations that have high
population-level exposure to air pollution (i.e., high non-motorized traffic volumes and high air pollution
concentrations) may be “hot-spots” of exposure that can be addressed by planners. Our work illustrates how
better information about where people cycle and walk can build an evidence-base for investment in facilities and
design guidelines that prioritize safety for non-motorized travel. Our results may be of interest to planners who
are interested in policy prescriptions related to cycling and walking (e.g., Complete Streets, Safe Routes to
School) or non-motorized travel in general.
References
 Boarnet, M.G. (2006). Planning’s role in building healthy city. Journal of the American Planning
Association, 72(1), 5-9. doi: 10.1080/01944360608976719
 Dumbaugh, E. & Li, W. (2010). Designing for the safety of pedestrians, cyclists, and motorists in urban
environments. Journal of the American Planning Association, 77(1), 69-88. doi:
10.1080/01944363.2011.536101
 Frank, L.D. & Engelke, P. (2005a). Multiple  impact of the built environment on public health: walkable
places and exposure to air pollution. International Regional Science Review, 28(2), 193-216. doi:
10.1177/0160017604273853





Hankey, S., Lindsey, G., Wang, X., Borah, J., Hoff, K., Utecht, B. & Xu, Z. (2012a). Estimating use of nonmotorized infrastructure: models of bicycle and pedestrian traffic in Minneapolis, MN. Landscape and
urban_planning, 107(3), 307-316. doi: 10.1016/j.landurbplan.2012.06.005
Loukaitou-Sideris, A., Medury, A., Fink, C., Grembek, O., Shafizadeh, K., Wong, N., Orrick, P. (2014).
Crashes on and near college campuses: a comparative analysis of pedestrian and bicyclist safety. Journal
of the American Planning Association, 80(3), 198-217. doi: 10.1080/01944363.2014.978354

Abstract Index #: 721
SOCIAL INFLUENCE IN TRANSPORATION MODE CHOICE
Abstract System ID#: 352
Individual Paper
PIKE, Susan [University of California, Davis] scpike@ucdavis.edu, presenting author, primary author
LUBELL, Mark [University of California, Davis] mnlubell@ucdavis.edu
This research investigates social influence in transportation mode choice, in order to explore the potential for
socially oriented program to be used in transportation planning aimed at increasing the use of alternative travel
modes. Social influence has been identified as a relevant factor in other behaviors and there is increasing
evidence that social influences are a relevant factor in transportation decision making as well. There are
examples of program that use social processes in order to promote the use of alternative modes of
transportation. The UC Davis goClub, in which members make a commitment to use alternatives to driving alone,
regularly offers incentives to current participants for enlisting their friends or colleagues into the program.
Another example is May is Bike Month; most participants are members of teams. Team membership likely
encourages competition between teams to be the team with the most miles, and cooperation within teams to
support the team by bicycling. Although most Bike Month participants joined the program after hearing about it
from someone they know, the effects of the social processes within the program are not known. Incorporating
elements of social processes in a thoughtful manner requires improved knowledge of the mechanisms through
which and the extent that social influence occurs.
We find that that individuals tend to use the same mode of transportation as those to whom they are socially
connected. Respondents with higher numbers of social contacts biking are more likely to bike themselves,
however similarities in behavior within social networks may be attributed to several plausible explanations.
Similar behaviors may be due to the effects of comparable or shared circumstances. Behaviors may also be
similar because individuals self-select into social groups. Shared traits such as environment attitudes could
contribute to the formation of friendships or professional relationships, and these same attitudes may result in
friends or colleagues making the same transportation choices. In addition, even when social influences are almost
certainly present, it may be difficult to determine who is influencing whom when socially connected individuals
have the same behavior. These sources of endogeneity are referred to as shared environment (similar
circumstances), self-selection (into friendships and ego-networks), and reflection (uncertainty in the direction of
influence). Accounting for these sources of endogeneity and identifying a remaining effect of social influences is
evidence that social effects matter in transportation choices.
Using a sample of university students, with data on their social networks and network transportation mode use,
we utilize an instrumental variables probit model to estimate the effect of social influence in transportation
mode choice. By using the instrumental variables approach, we account for the endogeneity that may result
when the ego and alter have similar choice environments. We also control for the ego’s neighborhood by
including the ego’s commute distance to campus in the model. We find that even when accounting for the shared
environment or circumstances for the ego and their social network, social influence is an important factor in
transportation mode choice. Future work will aim to better disentangle the competing explanations noted here.
Utilizing more structured research designs, such as experiments, these questions could be better addressed. Here
we show that there is evidence for social effects in transportation mode choice.

References
 Goetzke, Frank. Network Effects in Public Transit Use: Evidence from a Spatially Autoregressive Mode
Choice Model for New York. Urban Studies. Vol. 45, No. 2, 2008, pp. 407–417.
 Scott, Darren M. Antonio Páez, Ivy Dam and Robert Wilton. Investigating the effects of social influence
on the choice to telework. Environment and Planning A. Vol. 44, 2012 pp. 1016–1031.
 Goetzke, Frank. Network Effects in Public Transit Use: Evidence from a Spatially Autoregressive Mode
Choice Model for New York. Urban Studies. Vol. 45, No. 2, 2008, pp. 407–417.
 Goetzke, F., and T. Rave. Bicycle Use in Germany: Explaining Differences Between Municipalities with
Social Network Effects. Urban Studies. Vol. 48, No. 2, 2010, pp. 427–437.
 Wilton, Robert D., Antonio Páez, and Darren M. Scott. Why Do You Care What Other People Think? A
Qualitative Investigation of Social Influence and Telecommuting. Transportation Research Part A: Policy
and Practice. Vol. 45, No. 4, 2011, pp. 269–282.

Abstract Index #: 722
DETERMINANTS OF CO2 EMISSIONS FROM DAILY TRAVEL: A COMPARISON OF GERMANY AND THE UNITED
STATES
Abstract System ID#: 362
Individual Paper
BUEHLER, Ralph [Virginia Tech] ralphbu@vt.edu
Federal, state, and local governments in the USA have the goal to reduce petroleum use and associated
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions from ground passenger transport. The main approach to reducing energy
consumption and (more recently) related CO2 emissions from daily travel has focused on vehicle and fuel
technology. policy and regulations include fuel efficiency and CO2 emission standards for new vehicles, tax
incentives for the purchase of fuel efficient vehicles, lower vehicle registration fees and other incentives for fuel
efficient cars, as well as support for and regulation of alternative fuels.
In spite of these efforts, in 2010 CO2 emissions per capita from ground passenger transportation (walking, cycling,
public transportation, and driving) in the U.S. were 3 to 4 times greater than in wealthy Western European
countries like Austria, Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands, or Norway.
Different levels of energy consumption and CO2 emission are related to technological factors, such as fuel
efficiency of vehicles or fuel type, as well as mode choice and intensity of mode use. This presentation analyzes
differences in CO2 emissions from daily travel, vehicle fuel efficiency, travel behavior, and transportation policy in the
U.S. and Germany with the goal to provide insights for the U.S. on how to reduce CO2 emissions.
Germany was chosen for comparison, because it is Europe’s largest economy and most populous country.
Additionally, Germany and the U.S. share similarities that help make policy lessons more meaningful. Both
countries are wealthy western democracies with federal system of government, have among the highest
motorization rates in the world, boast large limited access highway networks, have a similar share of licensed
drivers in the population (70%), and are home to significant automobile industries.
This presentation first compares trends of CO2 emissions from passenger transportation in Germany and the USA
since 1990. Germany reduced CO2 emissions from passenger transportation at a faster rate than the USA—even
controlling for population growth, economic activity, and travel demand. Moreover, for all indicators CO2
emissions from transportation were much higher in the USA than in Germany: 11.7 times greater for total CO2
emissions, 3.1 times per capita, 2.1 times per passenger kilometer, and 2.4 times per unit of Gross Domestic
Product (GDP).
Analysis of person level data from national household travel surveys for the year 2008/2009 (NHTS 2008/2009 for
the USA and MiD 2008/2009 for Germany) indicates 2.3 greater travel related CO2 emissions per day per trip
maker in the USA than in Germany. In both countries CO2 emissions from daily travel are greater for men than

for women, employed individuals than those unemployed or not in the workforce, and persons with easier car
access.
Daily travel related CO2 emissions per person are lower in both countries for individuals living in larger
metropolitan area, in urban area, and at higher population densities. Even controlling for dissimilarities in
socio-economic factors and land-use, transportation related CO2 emissions per capita are much higher in the USA than
in Germany.
Next the presentation compares US and German transportation policy that can help explain these remaining
differences in CO2 emissions. policy analyzed include fuel economy and CO2 tailpipe emission standards,
vehicle registration fees and taxes, incentive program for the purchase of fuel efficient cars, and biofuel
standards. Moreover, the presentation highlights policy in Germany and the USA that shape the relative
attractiveness of driving, public transport, walking, and cycling. The analysis concludes with policy lessons for
both countries.
References
 EMBARQ (2010) Automobile Fuel; Economy and CO2 Emissions in Industrialized Countries: Troubling
Trends through 2005/6. 2007, Washignton, DC: EMBARQ: World Resources Institute.
 EPA. (2012). CO2 Emissions from Fossil Fuel Combustion in Transportation End-Use Sector. Washington,
DC: environment Protection Agency.
 IEA. (2012). CO2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion: 1971-2009. Paris, France: International Energy
Agency.
 Buehler, R. (2014). Daily Travel and CO2 Emissions from Passenger Transport: A Comparison of Germany
and the United States. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board.
 ICCT (2011) A Review and Comparative Analysis of Fiscal policy Associated with New Passenger Vehicle
CO2 Emissions. 2011, Washington, DC: International Council on Clean Transportation.

Abstract Index #: 723
SPATIAL STRUCTURE OF U.S. FREIGHT MOVEMENT: A NETWORK ANALYSIS APPROACH
Abstract System ID#: 365
Individual Paper
LEE, David Jung-Hwi [Georgia Institute of Technology] david.lee@coa.gatech.edu
Transportation vulnerability analysis is important subject matter and can be analysed by identifying important
nodes, links, paths, and sub-networks (Berdica, 2002). If critical nodes or links are mal-functioned due to natural
or man-made disastrous incidents, the entire network can be paralyzed.
This paper employs graph theory and complex network analysis to prioritize U.S. ports and identify critical nodes
(ports) and critical links (corridors) and assess vulnerability (or robustness) of U.S. freight networks. It investigates
freight flows through three modes (truck, rail, and air) in the freight network of the United States and examine
the network structure and nodal centrality of individual freight zones using data from Freight Analysis Framework
3 (FAF3) (Southworth et al., 2011). Centrality measures for overall network structure include in-degree, outdegree (Freeman, 1977; 1979; Borgatti, 2005), closeness centrality (Sabidussi, 1966; Freeman, 1978; Freeman,
1979; Wasserman and Faust, 1994; Borgatti, 2005; Opsahl et al., 2010), betweenness centrality (Anthonisse,
1971; Freeman, 1977; Brandes, 2001; Borgatti, 2005), eigenvector centrality (Bonacich, 1972; 2007; Bonacich and
Lloyd, 2001, 2004; Ruhnau, 2000), page rank (Langville A, 2006), clustering coefficient (Watts and Strogatz, 1998),
reciprocated vertex pair ratio, and actual volumes and values.
Freight movements are also analysed by commodity categories based on Standard Classification of Transported
Goods (SCTG) codes, in order to examine different spatial structures of supply chain of each commodity. Each
commodity has its own supply chains which uniquely characterize its spatial distribution patterns. Nationally
significant commodities were selected such as electronics (SCTG 35), crude petroleum (SCTG 16), machineries

(SCTG 34), and Cereal Grains (SCTG 02) and analysed for both inbound and outbound freight movements as well
as critical nodes and corridors as examples.
Understanding spatial structures of different commodities can provide policy developers and decision makers to
come up with better regional strategies to strengthen economic competitiveness and establish regional
advantages through industry clustering and multi modal connection improvement. In regions where
transportation connections are limited, regional political strategies can be modified to improve efficiency of
demand and supply chains of commodities and strengthen regional economic sustainability.
This paper shows that utilizing social network analysis, which is an analytical tool used predominantly by social
scientists to study structural characteristics of a social network, could be useful for network analysis in
conjunction with graph theory (Scott, 2000; Wasserman & Faust, 1994; Chai et al., 2011) in order to understand
characteristics of the given networks and improve sustainability of the system under any unexpected disastrous
events.
References
 Borgatti, S.P., (2005). Centrality and network flow. Social Networks; 27: 55–71.
 Borgatti, S., Everett, M.G., (2006). A graph-theoretic perspective on centrality. Social Networks; 28: 466484.
 Freeman, L.C., 1977. A set of measuring centrality based on betweenness. Sociometry 40, 35–41.
 Freeman, L.C., (1978). Centrality in social networks: conceptual clarification. Social Networks; 1: 215–
239.
 Freeman, L.C. et al., (1991). Centrality in valued graph: a measure of betweenness based on network
flow. Social Networks; 13: 141–54.

Abstract Index #: 724
INTERSECTING NATIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE POLICY WITH LOCAL DEVELOPMENT TRENDS, TRAVEL PATTERNS,
AND BUILDING FORMS
Abstract System ID#: 366
Individual Paper
LANDIS, John [University of Pennsylvania] jlan@design.upenn.edu, presenting author, primary author
HSU, David [University of Pennsylvania] hsuyd@design.upenn.edu
GUERRA, Erick [University of Pennsylvania] erickg@design.upenn.edu
President Obama’s June 2014 announcement of the EPA’s Clean Power initiative coupled with his earlier
agreement with American auto manufacturers to double corporate average (vehicle) fuel economy (CAFÉ)
standards to 55 mpg by 2025 have finally solidified the U.S. approach to reducing CO2 and mitigating climate
change. These policy shifts will coincide with several other ongoing trends: (1) The increased availability and
reduced cost of natural gas, particularly for electricity generation; (2) Increases in the number of U.S. households
who are favoring urban locations over suburban ones; (3) The fact that many Americans are driving less and
walking, bicycling, and taking transit more; and, (4) The fact that an increasing number of U.S. city are
considering imposing mandatory building energy performance standards. How will these various policy initiatives
and spatial development trends combine to affect future energy use and U.S. greenhouse gas emissions?
To find out, we will construct two “back of the envelope” activity-emissions models and apply them to a
representative set of ten U.S. metropolitan area. This work builds on, and disaggregates prior national-scale
work done by Ewing et.al. (2008a, 2008b), Ewing and Cervero (2010) and National Research Council (2010)
The first model will explore how changing rates of residential infill coupled with longer-term trends in ) per capita
VMT (vehicle miles of travel and transit and bike-pedestrian use will affect projected vehicle-based CO2 emissions
by 2020 and 2030. For example, a preliminary analysis of Los Angeles and Orange counties reveals that if rates of
infill development and VMT per capita levels were to continue at their 2010 levels, vehicle-based CO2 emissions

will decline by about 21% by 2030 compared to 2010 levels. Should infill development rates in the Los Angeles
region grow by 50%, and current trends toward reduced VMT per capita continue, and average vehicle mileage
climb to 40 miles per gallon, vehicle-based CO2 emissions would decline by as much as 48% by 2030 compared to
2010 levels.
Our second “back of the envelope” model will draw on available building energy use data (as published in the
Department of Energy’s metro-specific RBECS and CBECS surveys, and if available, the EPA’s EnergyStar building
database) to explore how increased rates of adoption of energy-efficient designs, materials, and control
technologies in the residential and commercial building stock might reduce building energy consumption by
2030. This model will be twinned with projections of increased fuel substitution toward natural gas and
renewables (as mandated by the President’s Clean Power initiative and state renewable portfolio standards) to
estimate the CO2 emissions reduction potential of more energy efficient buildings. These estimates, like those
generated by the previous model, will be driven by metropolitan area-specific projections of household and
employment growth and locations.
When combined, the results of both models should provide a reasonably accurate and representative picture of
how and where the current federal policy with local growth and development trends, if allowed to play out—or
perhaps nudged along—would lead to substantial reductions in greenhouse gas emissions by 2030.
Planners have long argued that locally-enacted spatial development policy, investments in alternative
transportation modes, and building energy conservation standards could go a long way to reducing CO2
emissions. This paper will explore how large those reductions might reasonably be in the context of real and
contemporary places, trends, and policy.
References
 Reid Ewing, Keith Bartholomew, Steve Winkelman, and Don Chen. 2008a. Growing Cooler: The Evidence
on Urban Development and Climate Change. The Urban Land Institute
 Reid Ewing & Fang Rong (2008b) The impact of urban form on U.S. residential energy use, Housing Policy
Debate, 19:1, 1-30,
 Reid Ewing & Robert Cervero (2010) Travel and the built environment, Journal of the American Planning
Association, 76:3, 265-294
 National Research Council. 2009. Driving and the Built Environment. TRB Special Report 298.

Abstract Index #: 725
DOES TOD NEED RETAIL?- RETAIL EMPLOYMENT NEAR
Abstract System ID#: 368
Individual Paper
MILLER, Matt [University of Utah] matt439miller@gmail.com
Transit Oriented Development (TOD) has become the dominant planning paradigm for developing the land
around transit stations. Core to the idea of TOD is a retail core wrapped around the station, surrounded by
residential. However, the actual performance of retail near transit stations is erratic. This paper analyzes retail
employment near light rail stations in 11 different metropolitan area to determine if the Retail Trade Industry, as
measured by retail employment, benefits from proximity to light rail transit. Results show that few places do,
although notable exceptions exist. The mis-application of the TOD concept from a greenfield/redevelopment
context to an infill context. This calls into question the appropriateness of zoning for retail near most transit
stations.

Abstract Index #: 726
TRAFFIC CONGESTION, ACCESSIBILITY TO EMPLOYMENT AND HOUSING PRICES: A STUDY OF SINGLE-FAMILY
HOUSING MARKET IN LOS ANGELES COUNTY

Abstract System ID#: 375
Individual Paper
HOU, Yuting [University of Southern California] yutingho@usc.edu
Central theme and hypothesis:
In standard urban economic theory, transportation access to jobs is usually considered one of the most important
locational determinants of housing price (Alonso 1964). Traffic congestion is closely related with access to jobs,
but has not been often examined in previous empirical studies on residential structure. This study estimates the
extent to which costs of congestion delays are valued by households in their residential location decisions by
exploring the relationship between traffic congestion, accessibility to jobs and their effects on housing prices. The
central hypothesis is that traffic congestion will negatively impact housing price by constraining the accessibility
advantage of locations at the regional level and increasing traffic density at the local level, all else equal. Mover,
we expect that households in different neighborhood value access to jobs and congestion differently, given their
differences in the opportunity cost of commuting time and desire for housing space. The study uses the singlefamily housing market in Los Angeles County as an example.
Approach and methodology:
This study uses the hedonic price model to examine the effects of access to jobs and congestion on single-family
housing prices within Los Angeles County. The basic model specifies housing prices as a function of housing
structural characteristics, transaction years, accessibility/congestion levels, and other neighborhood-level control
factors, including local traffic density, socio-economic characteristics,  land_use characteristics, and local school
quality. Considering that more accessible locations are also more likely to be congested and measures of
accessibility and measures of congestion could be highly correlated, we follow Graham’s (2007) approach and
estimate congestion effects indirectly by constructing two groups of accessibility measures, one associated with
free-flow travel time and the other with congested travel time, estimating two separate price models using the
two measures and comparing the implicit prices of the two measures. The basic assumption is that if congestion
matters, the congested travel-time-based measure would be a better predictor of housing prices.
We use the hierarchical linear modeling approach to deal with the spatial autocorrelation problem among houses
located within the same neighborhood. This approach allows housing structural characteristics and locational
characteristics, which are aggregated at different geographic scales, to be considered simultaneously (Giuliano et
al. 2010; Moulton 1990). To account for the housing market segmentation, we extend the basic two-level linear
model to a three-level linear model, where the third level is defined by groups of neighborhood of similar
income levels based on the aggregate information on residents. The effects of accessibility/congestion are
allowed to be random at the third level to examine whether and to what extent households of different income
groups value access to jobs and travel time savings differently.
Relevance to planning practice:
This study aims to add to empirical evidence on the economic  impact of congestion by focusing on the spatial
distribution of housing prices and accessibility at the intrametropolitan scale. The results indicate that implicit
price on the accessibility measures measured with congested travel time yields higher marginal price, which
suggests that households are more responsive to peak-hour travel time. The results also suggest that the effects
of job access are more valued by home buyers in middle-income neighborhood, compared with those in the
lowest income or highest income neighborhood. Neighborhood-level dis-amenity effects of congestion,
measured by local traffic density, are not significant once the effect of accessibility is controlled. In sum, the
results support our main hypothesis that traffic congestion plays a significant role in constraining the accessibility
premium in housing prices. The findings of this study may provide useful implications for how we think about
congestion in urban transportation and  land_use planning.
References
 Alonso, William. 1964. Location and  land_use: Towards a General Theory of Land Rent. Harvard
University Press.






Solow, Robert M. 1972. "Congestion, Density and the Use of Land in Transportation." The Swedish
Journal of Economics 74 (1):161–173.
Giuliano, Genevieve, Peter Gordon, Qisheng Pan, and JiYoung Park. 2010. "Accessibility and Residential
Land Values: Some Tests with New Measures." Urban Studies 47 (14):3103–3130.
Graham, Daniel J. 2007. "Variable Returns to Agglomeration and the Effect of Road Traffic Congestion."
Journal of Urban Economics 62 (1):103–120.
Moulton, Brent R. 1990. "An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of Aggregate Variables on
Micro Units." The Review of Economics and Statistics 72 (2):334–338.

Abstract Index #: 727
SAME TRIP, DIFFERENT MODES: SELF-REPORTED TRAVEL TIME VARIATIONS BY MODES USED TO ACCESS A
UNIVERSITY CAMPUS FOR USERS WITH VARYING TRAVEL PATTERNS
Abstract System ID#: 376
Individual Paper
LACHAPELLE, Ugo [University of Quebec in Montreal] lachapelle.ugo@uqam.ca
Use of alternative modes of transportation (public transit, walking and cycling) is assumed to be less popular
partly because of their relative slower speed and longer travel time as compared to car travel. Because most
travel surveys only collect information on trips taken during a day, few opportunities exist to actually compare
access time by different modes for the same trip origins and destinations. Such analysis can help establish
thresholds below which modes compete favorably with respect to travel time.
The objective of this paper is to assess the relationship between frequency of use of various modes, travel time
by modes and trip distance for trips linking home to University. A comparison of reported travel time and travel
time difference for pairs of trips linking home and University campus by different modes is conducted for
respondents reporting using a variety of travel modes during the year to access a University campus.
A campus travel survey of students and employees was conducted at the University of Quebec in Montreal in
March 2014 (n=4182). The survey included questions on mode use frequency during the past year, travel time by
modes used to access campus, travel distance (through geocoding of postal codes or nearest intersection to
residence and street network distance calculation) and socio demographic characteristics. Analysis of variance for
travel times by frequency of use and by categories of travel distance enabled the observation of associations
between travel time, frequency of use and distance categories for trips conducted using different modes.
Pairwise t-test on travel time differences for pairs of modes was used to assess average variation in travel time
depending on modes used. Finally, Ordinary Least Square (OLS) regressions on the factors associated with travel
time differences for pairs of modes are conducted using personal characteristics, student or employee status at
the University and distance from residence to the University.
As the frequency of use of automobile increased, travel time by auto increased. The inverse relationship was
found for walk and cycling time in relation to frequency of use. For example, for walking, users declaring always
walking have an average travel time of 21 minutes, while those rarely walking require on average 59 minutes to
get to campus by walking.
For the same individual taking the same home to University trip, car travel is on average usually shorter than
bike, walk and transit travel time (respectively by 11, 30 and 14 minutes), but transit does not significantly differ
from bicycling time (29 minutes average travel time for both). These mean differences obscure the fact that
depending on home to campus distance, differences can be close to null, or even in the opposite directions than
expected.
To assess thresholds where alternative modes become competitive with automobile travel, OLS regression
estimates of travel time difference by pairs of mode are used to compute thresholds below which active travel
modes and public transit are time competitive with automobile travel and with each other. Network distance

from residence to University is the main significant explanatory variable in most models. For shorter distances,
the travel time difference is shorter, and increases as distance to campus increases.
Although access mode to campus is largely stable across the year and highly oriented towards public transit use,
a large share of participants did use various modes for home to University trips and their frequency of use of any
given mode was associated with the mode’s travel time. Distance thresholds below which alternative modes can
become competitive can serve to advocate for student and staff housing in proximity to campus as well as end of
trip facilities for active modes.
References
 Balsas, C. J. L. (2006). "Transportation and Sustainable Campus comminuty: Issues, Examples,
Solutions." American Planning Association. Journal of the American Planning Association 72(3): 369-370.
 Lachapelle, U. (2015). "Favoriser les déplacements actifs des étudiants et employés de la communauté
de l’UQAM." Revue Routes et Transports. Association québécoise des transports, AQTr) 44(1): 39-42.
 Manaugh, K. and A. M. El-Geneidy (2013). "Does distance matter? Exploring the links among values,
motivations, home location, and satisfaction in walking trips." Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
Practice 50(0): 198-208.
 Shannon, T., B. Giles-Corti, T. Pikora, M. Bulsara, T. Shilton and F. Bull (2006). "Active commuting in a
university setting: Assessing commuting habits and potential for modal change." transportation Policy 13(3):
240-253.
 Whalen, K. E., A. Páez and J. A. Carrasco (2013). "Mode choice of university students commuting to
school and the role of active travel." Journal of transportation Geography 31(0): 132-142.

Abstract Index #: 728
MEASURING TRANSPORTATION INEQUALITY
Abstract System ID#: 387
Individual Paper
SEHATZADEH, Bahareh [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] sehatzadeh@gmail.com
Historically transportation planning in the United States has focused on promoting mobility as its central
principle. Extensive investment in highways and roads and promoting car as the centerpiece of the American
Dream have created hypermobile comminuty. Benefits of mobility have environment costs as well as social
costs. High mobility levels cause disadvantaged individuals who are financially, culturally or physically restrained
in increasing their mobility patterns to become even more disadvantaged (Handy, 2005). Transportation system
can provide some with high levels of mobility and freedom while preventing others from accessing essential
activities to fully engage in society. Therefore transportation planners need to not only focus on mobility but also
take into consideration the social context of transportation. There are currently not adequate measures to
address social issues including transportation inequality. The FHWA is developing guidance on new performance
measures to evaluate the impact of transportation funding given to the states, and among this will be measures
of social disparity. The main objective of this study is to develop a set of measures and indices that assist in
evaluating and studying transportation inequality with an application in Los Angeles County.
Transportation inequality is a concept with many components. It can refer to the unfair distribution of costs and
benefits of transportation system including but not limited to governmental subsidies in favor of private vehicles
versus transit; unfair burden of transportation projects on low income and minority comminuty through the
disparate distribution of traffic externalities; and, unequal participation of comminuty in decision making
processes, among others. Unequal access is also an important part of the inequality problem mainly because it
can exacerbate social exclusion. transportation related social exclusion is defined as the process by which people are
prevented from participating in the economic, political and social life of the community because of reduced
accessibility to opportunities, services and social networks. In the United States, concerns about providing equal
access to social and economic opportunities has mostly centered on the issue of access to employment, health
care, and food (Hansen, 1959; Blumenberg & Ong, 2001; Guagliardo et al., 2004; Walker et al., 2010). The main

gap in the existing literature, however, is the lack of multidimensional indicators of accessibility from a social
exclusion point of view and indices to measure unequal distribution of these indicators across comminuty. This
is the focus of this paper.
This paper is organized in 2 sections. The first section is dedicated to developing a set of indices of transportation
inequality. Statistical correlation studies and GIS tools are utilized in this step to develop alternative composite
indices to measure access and how it is distributed across different population groups. The second section tests
developed indices in evaluating policy. To do so the County of Los Angeles is selected as a case study before and
after implementation of Measure R projects. Measure R is a half-cent sales tax for Los Angeles County to finance
new transportation projects and program, and accelerate those already in the pipeline. Primary sources of data
utilized in this study include Bureau of the Census, American FactFinder, Census TIGER ﬁles, Census
Transportation Planning Package, Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics, OpenStreetMap, California
Household Travel Survey, Metro’s Official Blog of Transit Data and Technology, SCAG GIS library, and
GoogleTransitDataFeed.
I expect to have a set of inequality indices at the end of this research that can expose strengths and weaknesses
of a policy such as Measure R in alleviating transportation inequality and social exclusion. These multidimensional
indices can highlight which area of the county do not have sufficient access or which services are not accessible
enough yet. This will help planners and policy makers to recognize area in need of further attention and guide
funding priorities.
References
 Blumenberg, E., & Ong, P. (2001). Cars, Buses, and Jobs: Welfare Participants and Employment Access in
Los Angeles. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 1756(1),
22-31.
 Guagliardo, M. F. (2004). Spatial Accessibility of Primary Care: Concepts, Methods and Challenges.
International Journal of Health Geographics, 3(1), 3.
 Handy, S. L. (2005). Planning for Accessibility: In Theory and in Practice. K. Krizek, D. Levinson (Eds.),
Access to Destinations, Elsevier, Oxford, 2005.
 Hansen, W.G. (1959). How Accessibility Shapes  land_use. Journal of the American Planning Institute,
Vol. 25, pp. 73-76.
 Walker, R. E., Keane, C. R., & Burke, J. G. (2010). Disparities and Access to Healthy Food in the United
States: A Review of Food Deserts Literature. Health & place, 16(5), 876-884.

Abstract Index #: 729
MEASURING THE EFFECTS OF JOB COMPETITION ON ACCESSIBILITY
Abstract System ID#: 389
Individual Paper
PAN, Qisheng [Texas Southern University] pan_qs@tsu.edu
JIN, Tony [Texas Southern University] tonyjintsu@gmail.com, presenting author, primary author
As a key concept of urban transportation and  land_use, accessibility has been used to assess the socio-economic
interactions in urban area. The development and implementation of many kinds of accessibility measurements in
existing studies have not only suggested different ways to interpret and measure accessibility, but also drawn
many importation conclusions (Bhat et al., 2001; Bunel and Tovar, 2013). However, due to the complexity of
representation and interpretation, many studies have omitted job competition from the measure of accessibility.
In reality, competition exists for employees to compete for jobs and employers compete for workers. Besides of
commute cost, job competition and job matching are also important factors that affect individual’s decision
making of job locations. In order to obtain better results, this study adopts a method modified from traditional
accessibility measures to assess job accessibility and job opportunities based on job proximity, density, and
competition. It calculates the number of job opportunities that can be reached within a certain amount of travel
time. It selects Houston as an empirical case to estimate the total job accessibility. Comparing with the results
from previous studies, this study shows improved measures of job accessibility in a complex urban environment.

References
 Bhat, C., Handy, S., Kockelman, K., Mahmassani, H., Chen, Q., Srour, I., and Weston, L. (2001),
Assessment of Accessibility Measures, http://www.utexas.edu/research/ctr/pdf_reports/4938_3.pdf
 Bunel, M. and Tovar, E. (2013), Key issue in local job accessibility measurement: different models mean
different results, Urban Studies, 51(6), 1322-1338 Hu, L. (2014), Changing job access of the poor: effects
of spatial and socioeconomic transformations in Chicago, 1990-2010, Urban Studies, 51(4), 675-692
 Cheng, J. and Bertolini, L. (2013), Measuring urban job accessibility with distance decay, competition and
diversity, Journal of transportation Geography, 30, 100-109
 Wee, B.V., Hagoort, M., Annema, J.A. (2001), Accessibility measures with competition, Journal of
Transport Geography, 9, 199-208
 Levine, J., Grengs, J., Shen, Q., & Shen, Q. (2012), Does Accessibility Require Density or Speed, Journal of
the American Planning Association, 78(2).

Abstract Index #: 730
HELPING GATEWAY comminuty EMBRACE ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION
Abstract System ID#: 401
Individual Paper
DUNNING, Anne [University of Kansas] dunning@ku.edu
Considerations of protected lands cannot stop at the official borders of those lands. Bordering comminuty
support the lands, and the lands support those comminuty. In these symbiotic relationships, residents of
gateway comminuty provide a service to land managers when they work on the lands and locally serve visitors
to those lands by providing lodging, supplies, and dining. In turn, residents benefit from the power of protected
lands to attract tourism to the local area.
Transportation issues fundamentally transcend the boundaries between protected lands and gateway or
inholding comminuty. Roads link these spaces, and public transit serves both people and places in both realms.
Planning transportation in and around protected lands requires attention to the many stakeholders who feel the
effects of transportation decisions.
Proactive communication can generate support for alternative-transportation initiatives. The need for
communication between protected area and gateway comminuty emerges when transportation services cross
boundaries, but collaborative partnerships and planning processing involving local stakeholders can contribute to
joint financing schemes,  land_use supportive of transportation initiatives, and strategies for disseminating public
information (Dunning 2005).
For many public lands, the greatest traffic congestion and related safety issues occur in internal parking area and
at entrance gates. Coordinating transportation planning in conjunction with gateway comminuty can help
alleviate these internal problems by considering both the resources of a larger area and the full travel needs of
visitors. If alternative transportation system can keep private vehicles from entering public lands, congestion
points dissipate. Keeping private vehicles away from entrance gates requires encouraging visitors to choose
alternative transportation outside the border in gateway comminuty. How locals represent and endorse
alternative transportation system to tourists can significantly impact the degree to which visitors use alternative
transportation. Gateway comminuty are critical partners in transportation system.
This paper examines strategies for land managers and community leaders to encourage collaboration in planning,
supporting, and using alternative transportation system. Many of the documented strategies have covered cases
in the United States although this paper has incorporated international references where available. To date, two
key reports have assessed how public-land managers can best engage and interact with gateway comminuty.

•

•

National Park Service Alternative Transportation Program (2003). “Partnering for Success: Techniques
for Working with Partners to Plan for Alternative Transportation in National Park Service Units,”
prepared by the USDOT Volpe National Transportation system Center.
http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/48000/48200/48216/NPS_Partnering_for_Success_2003.pdf
Texas Transportation Institute and Cambridge Systematics (2009). “Innovative Transportation Planning
Partnerships to Enhance National Parks and Gateway comminuty,” a report prepared as part of NCHRP
project 08-36 of the National Cooperative Highway Research Program, Transportation Research Board.
http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/nchrp/docs/NCHRP08-36 (83)_FR.pdf

These reports, which are freely available on the internet, offer strong reference material for land managers. The
documents provide observations and analysis from case studies for interaction among public lands and gateway
communities.
This paper conflates, classifies, and elaborates on the findings of these reports, incorporating information from
other sources within this structure. Subsections of this paper have explored characteristics of gateway and
inholding comminuty as well as techniques and considerations for engaging local stakeholders.
References
 Davis, Jeffrey Sasha and Morais, Duarte B. (2004), “Factions and Enclaves: Small Towns and Socially
Unsustainable Tourism Development,” Journal of Travel Research, 43:3.
 Institute of Transportation Engineers (2015), Transportation Planning Handbook, 4th Edition.
 Meyer, M.; Campbell, S.; and, Coogan, M. (2005),. "Collaboration: Key to Success in Transportation",
Journal of the Transportation Research Board 1924, Washington D.C: National Academy Press.
 Rhindress, Mindy; Lynch, Frank; Bregman, Susan; Reichman, Rose E; Coopersmith, Nancy J; and,
Dunning, John A (2008)., TCRP Report 122: Understanding How to Motivate comminuty to Support and
Ride Public Transportation, Transit Cooperative Research Program, Transportation Research Board,
Washington D.C: the National Academies Press.
 Zonneveld, Robert (2011),. “Lost in transitions: staging global tourism in local small towns,” a doctoral
dissertation submitted to Lincoln University, New Zealand.
http://researcharchive.lincoln.ac.nz/handle/10182/4543

Abstract Index #: 731
EXPLORING QUALITY OF SERVICE OF BRT AND CONVENTIONAL BUSES IN INDORE, INDIA: AN APPLICATION OF
IMPORTANCE-PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
Abstract System ID#: 416
Individual Paper
RAMASWAMI, Anu [University of Minnesota] anu@umn.edu
ZHANG, Chen [University of Minnesota] zhan3373@umn.edu, presenting author, primary author
NAGPURE, Ajay [University of Minnesota] anagpure@umn.edu
Bus rapid transit (BRT) system have gradually become popular worldwide during the past few decades. Transit
planners expect BRT to attract choice riders and reduce the growth of congestion through providing high quality
service such as reliability and safety. According to the service marketing literature, quality of service includes two
key characteristics, namely “user-perceived performance” (satisfaction) and “importance”. As a combined
approach of these two dimensions, Importance-Performance Analysis (IPA) has been widely used to identify
service attributes with a high importance but low performance, which need to be prioritized to improve.
However, the traditional measurement on explicitly-stated importance of service attributes can be misleading
since it assumes that satisfaction and importance are independent and symmetric. This study presents an
analytical procedure to identify a more accurate measurement on importance: implicitly derived importance. We
develop a trivariate ordered probit model on survey data for three types of transit services (BRT, conventional
bus, and para-transit) in Indore, India to modify the importance measure in traditional IPA. We present an
Implicit Importance–Performance Analysis (IIPA) and compare with the traditional explicit IPA. The traditional IPA

for BRT demonstrates that no attributes fall in the “high importance but low performance” quadrant. When we
employ IIPA, travel time, hours of service, and ease of use are low in performance but high in importance. Thus,
they are the attributes that need to be prioritized within a concentrated budget. To understand the competitive
advantages of BRT system, we will also conduct comparative IPAs for conventional bus and para-transit. Overall,
we expect this new approach will offer a more accurate understanding on transit service quality improvement
priority.
References
 Matzler, K., Sauerwein, E., & Heischmidt, K. (2003). Importance-performance analysis revisited: the role
of the factor structure of customer satisfaction. The Service Industries Journal, 23(2), 112-129.
 Oh, H. (2001). Revisiting importance–performance analysis. Tourism management, 22(6), 617-627.
 Givoni, M., & Rietveld, P. (2007). The access journey to the railway station and its role in passengers’
satisfaction with rail travel. transportation Policy, 14(5), 357-365.
 Park, J. W., Robertson, R., & Wu, C. L. (2006). Modelling the impact of airline service quality and
marketing variables on passengers’ future behavioural intentions. Transportation Planning and
Technology, 29(5), 359-381.

Abstract Index #: 732
THE ROLE OF NATIONAL policy ON LOCAL SCHOOL SITING, SCHOOL transportation AND OPTIONS FOR
CHILDREN'S TRAVEL TO SCHOOL IN THE UNITED STATES AND UNITED KINGDOM
Abstract System ID#: 444
Individual Paper
STEINER, Ruth [University of Florida] rsteiner@dcp.ufl.edu, presenting author, primary author
MARSDEN, Greg [United Kingdom] G.R.Marsden@its.leeds.ac.uk
Background:
Recent studies throughout the world show a decline in the rate of children walking and bicycling to school and its
impact on educational outcomes and children’s health. Much of the research on change has focused on national
policies to increase the rate of bicycling and walking resulting from program, such as, the Safe Routes to School,
to increase the level of walking and bicycling. Yet, studies of the choice of mode to school consistently show that
the distance to school is among the greatest predictor of children’s mode of travel to school. The travel distance
to school is a function of the relationship between the location of residences and schools. This seeks to
understand the role of national planning policy related to land development, school location, and school
transportation to understand how they are implemented at the local level and influence the travel choices of
families.
The policy environment for schools, land development and school transportation has been changing in both the
United States and England. After many years of decline in school-aged population, immigration from Eastern
Europe to the UK is placing pressure on many local governments to provide additional school capacity. The UK
has historically had very strong policy requiring land development within existing urban area. However, the
land development regulations have recently been changed to allow development outside of developed area. In
addition, national policy have begun to support the creation of academies, which use public funding for the
private sector to build and manage school. In the US, the policy on land development, school siting and
children’s travel are largely regulated at the state and local level. but are strongly influenced by industry
standards regarding school site size. In recent years, the school closures have taken place in central city while
schools continue to be built at the urban fringe. At the same time, the fiscal constraints on local government
finance may be changing the decision-making about where schools are located and whether new schools are built
at the urban fringe.
Study Design:
This research will use a case study of school and transportation planning in England and the US to understand the
interaction of these policy including a review of national legislation, local program and interviews with

planners, and other professionals engaged in activities to make decisions about school location and school
transport. In order to understand the challenges associated with these changes, current national legislation
related to school location, school transport, and children’s travel and local policy implementation in several local
governments are reviewed and interviews were conducted with local government officials in these area to
understand how the national policy are implemented at the local level
Primary & Expected Result:
The initial analysis suggests mixed results in the UK; school sizes are smaller and serve smaller geographic area
but, in some contexts, mostly rural area, parents may need to drive their children to school where they would
not be required in the US. However, local governments have the responsibility to provide transportation services even
though they have little control over the costs.
Relevance of work to planning education, practice, or scholarship
The system in England can be seen as an example of an unfunded mandate. Yet, local governments are
innovating in a variety of ways. The results can be used to understand options for local governments and school
districts in the US to think about how to respond to federal and state education mandates can have a significant
impact on local government operations and costs.
References
 van Ristell, J.A., Quddus, M.A., Enoch, M.P., Wang, C., Hardy, P.: (2014)Quantifying the  impact of
subsidy policy on home-to-school pupil travel by bus in England. Transportation. doi: 10.1007/s11116014-9525-6
 McDonald, N. C., Steiner, R. L., Palmer, W. M., Bullock, A. N., Sisiopiku, V. P., & Lytle, B. F. (2014). Costs
of school transportation: quantifying the fiscal  impact of encouraging walking and bicycling for school
travel. Transportation, 1-17.
 Steiner, R. L., Bejleri, I., Wheelock, J. L., Perez, B. O., Provost, R. E., Fischman, A., Boles, G., and Cahill, M.
(2011). How Policy Drives Mode Choice in Children’s Transportation to School: An Analysis of Four
Florida School Districts., School Siting and Healthy comminuty: Why Where We Invest in School
Facilities Matters (pp. 147-64). East Lansing, MI: Michigan State University Press
 McDonald, N. C. (2010). School Siting: contested visions of the community school. Journal of the
American Planning Association, 76(2), 184-198.
 McDonald, N. C. (2008). Children’s mode choice for the school trip: the role of distance and school
location in walking to school. Transportation, 35(1), 23-35.

Abstract Index #: 733
BIKESHARING EFFECT ON TRANSIT RIDERSHIP: A TIME-SERIES ANALYSIS OF THE CAPITAL BIKESHARE
PROGRAM (CABI)
Abstract System ID#: 458
Individual Paper
LIU, Chao [University of Maryland] cliu8@umd.edu, presenting author, primary author
MA, Ting [University of Maryland at College Park] tingma@umd.edu
ERDOGAN, Sevgi [University of Maryland at College Park] serdogan@umd.edu
Bicycle sharing program continue to increase in popularity and gain attention for the ability to achieve
environmental, health, and equity benefits for the comminuty. Another largely accepted benefit of bikesharing
programs includes their positive  impact on transit ridership by extending transit catchment area and providing
last/first-mile connections. Thus, locating bikesharing stations near transit stations can be an effective way of
integrating both modes, encouraging more bicycling and transit usage. However, the question of how and to
what extent bicycle sharing program affect transit ridership remains to be answered despite the attempts of few
empirical and quantitative studies. Among the studies investigating the relationship between  land_use and transit
use, direct ridership models (DRM) have been widely used. DRM is a sketch-up tool that is typically used for
estimating ridership as a function of station built environment, transit service, and socio-demographics. It

provides ridership estimates without relying on mode choice from large – scale traditional travel demand models
(Cervero, 2007; Cervero, 2009; Gutiérrez and García-Palomares, 2011; Kuby, Barranda, and C. Upchurch, 2006).
However, to date, the efforts to study the linkage of bikesharing program and transit uses have been limited.
Only few recent studies considered bikesharing usage as a factor in the DRM analysis (Rixey, 2013; Zhao et al.,
2014; Martin and Shaheen, 2014).
In this paper, we will examine  impact of the Capital Bikeshare (CaBi) program on Metrorail transit ridership
applying DRM. Established in September 2010, CaBi offered the largest bicycle sharing service in the U.S. at the
time. Over the past four years, CaBi expanded the coverage area to nearby Virginia and Maryland, with a
network of over 300 stations in four jurisdictions. The expansion of bikesharing program over time provides an
opportunity to study the relationship between bikesharing and transit usage both spatially and temporally. We
will gather data for 86 metrorail stations from a variety of sources including Washington Metropolitan Area
Transit Authority (WMATA), U.S. Census, National Center for Smart Growth (NCSG) data inventory, and
Washington D.C. Department of Transportation (DDOT). Data are categorized by bikesharing program usage,
transit service characteristics, station built environment features and social-demographic variables. Data for CaBi
has been obtained from CaBi and DC GIS websites. In order to fully understand how CaBi affects transit ridership
overtime, time-series regression models will be developed. Ridership data of the CaBi program and transit will be
collected for years 2010 to 2014. The results of this analysis can provide insights on the relationship between
bikesharing program and transit. Potential policy implications regarding CaBi program expansion and the
integration of bicycle and transit will be discussed.
References
 Cervero, R. Transit-oriented development’s ridership bonus: a product of self-selection and public
policies. Environment and Planning A, Vol. 39, No. 9, 2007, pp. 2068 – 2085.
 Cervero, R., J. Murakami, and M. A. Miller. Direct Ridership Model of Bus Rapid Transit in Los Angeles
County. Jun. 2009.
 Cervero, R. Alternative Approaches to Modeling the Travel-Demand  impact of Smart Growth. Journal of
the American Planning Association, Vol. 72, No. 3, 2006, pp. 285–295.
 Martin, Elliot W, and Susan A Shaheen. "Evaluating public transit modal shift dynamics in response to
bikesharing: a tale of two US city." Journal of transportation Geography 41 (2014): 315-324.
 Kuby, M., A. Barranda, and C. Upchurch. Factors influencing light-rail station boardings in the United
States. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, Vol. 38, No. 3, Mar. 2004, pp. 223–247.

Abstract Index #: 734
A HEDONIC SPATIAL PANEL APPROACH TO ESTIMATING THE IMPACT OF NETWORK ACCESS TO BIKE AND
PUBLIC TRANSIT FACILITIES ON HOUSING PRICES
Abstract System ID#: 479
Individual Paper
WELCH, Timothy [Georgia Institute of Technology] tim.welch@coa.gatech.edu, presenting author, primary author
GEHRKE, Steven [Portland State University] sgehrke@pdx.edu
WANG, Fangru [Georgia Institute of Technology] fangru@gatech.edu
Urban economists and planners have largely accepted the notion that increased proximity to transportation
facilities positively  impact the market value of a housing unit by providing the household with greater access to
activity locations. Yet, outside of the oft-studied relationship on housing price and proximity to transit stations,
there has been limited empirical study of how an increased proximity to bike facilities influences the sales price
of a house. Moreover, the findings from studies into the housing price benefits of public transit station proximity
have yet to establish any consensus due to the adoption of widely varying and insufficient methodologies. In
response, this study develops a hedonic spatial panel modeling approach to estimate the added housing value of
improved network proximity to bike lanes and multi-use paths as well as light rail and streetcar stations in the
City of Portland, Oregon from 2002-2013. The application of this framework advances the evidence base by
offering the first hedonic analysis of bike infrastructure to utilize a longitudinal dataset in addition to conducting

an assessment of the joint influence of bike and transit proximity on housing sales price. The results of this
research reveal that housing value was significantly and positively related to increased proximity to light rail or
streetcar stations and may also be positively influenced by proximity to bike lanes or multi-use paths. Given the
new findings highlighted by this methodologically innovative study, innovative transportation infrastructure
financing mechanisms, particularly those that rely on rising property values may be better informed.
References
 Elhorst, J. P. Specification and estimation of spatial panel data models. International Regional Science
Review, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2003, pp. 244-268.
 Krizek, K. J. Two approaches to valuing some of bicycle facilities’ presumed benefits. Journal of the
American Planning Association, Vol. 72, No. 3, 2006, pp. 309-320.
 Lewis-Workman, S. and D. Brod. Measuring the neighborhood benefits of rail transit accessibility. In
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, No. 1576,
Transportation Research Board of the National Academies, Washington, D. C., 1997, pp. 147-153.
 Rosen, S. Hedonic prices and implicit markets: Product differentiation in pure competition. Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 82, No. 1, 1974, pp. 34-55.
 Sirmans, G. S., D. A. Macpherson, and M. A. Zeitz. The composition of hedonic pricing models. Journal of
Real Estate Literature, Vol. 13, No. 1, 2005, pp. 1-44.

Abstract Index #: 735
THE INFLUENCE OF REGIONAL GOVERNANCE STRATEGIES ON TRANSIT PERFORMANCE AND SERVICE QUALITY:
MULTIPLE-CASE STUDY OF U.S. TRANSIT system
Abstract System ID#: 498
Individual Paper
JAROSZYNSKI, Michal [Florida State University] mjaroszynski@fsu.edu
The ongoing decentralization of U.S. metropolitan regions has a significant impact on public transportation
planning. One of the common challenges faced by planners is providing adequate coordination of transit services
across multiple administrative boundaries intersecting contiguous urbanized area (Meyer et al, 2005). Specific
jurisdictions often have divergent transportation needs and different attitudes towards collaborating with their
peers on designing and financing transit services. In some cases, these disparities restrain certain municipalities
from regional cooperation, or prevent larger agencies from expanding their services to the outlying area.
Consequently, multiple models of regional transit governance and various degrees of system integration exist
across the nation’s urbanized regions. These models range from full integration of all transit services within the
entire region, to cases where multiple, partitioned, and poorly connected system operate in adjacent
jurisdictions (Iseki et al, 2011). This paper investigates the relationship between the adopted governance strategy
and key indicators of transit service and performance, measured at the regional level. The primary objective of
this research study is to identify most successful regional governance mechanisms in the terms of their effects on
transit agencies and riders.
This study utilizes service quality measures (e.g. accessibility, travel time) as well as performance indicators (e.g.
ridership, operating costs). A combination of descriptive statistics and regression analysis is employed to explore
the dependence between the adopted governance model and certain types of transit outcomes. It also includes a
brief policy overview, identifying and categorizing specific governance mechanisms and investigating their
emergence and functioning over time. A combination of quantitative and qualitative results serves as a base for
drawing additional insights on best practices in regional transit governance. All urbanized area with population
between 500,000 and 5,000,000 are included in the study, and for each of them, annual observations for the
2001 – 2013 period are considered.
This research aims to inform the planners and scholars whether adopting certain types of regional collaboration
could improve the outcomes of transit in the terms of higher ridership and modal share, efficiency, as well as
other common objectives of public transportation. Very few evaluations of various types of regional transit

governance models were conducted in the past, and most of them were focused on descriptive discussion of
specific regional transit governance mechanisms. Quantitative assessments, if any, were limited to only a few
cases (Jaroszynski, 2014). This research intends to fill that gap and bring new lessons on the influence of
governance models on region-wide transit performance and attractiveness, and on best practices in facilitating
collaborative transit planning within America’s metropolitan area.
References
 Iseki, H., C. Rivasplata, R. Houtman, A. Smith, C. Seifert, and T. Sudar (2011). Examination of Regional
Transit Service Under Contracting: A Case Study in the Greater New Orleans Region. MTI Report 10-09.
San Jose, California: Mineta Transportation Institute.
 Jaroszynski, M. (2014). Roles of Service Planning and Organizational Decisions Influencing the Economic
Sustainability of Multimodal Bus and Light Rail Transit system. Ph.D. Dissertation, Florida State
University, Tallahassee.
 Meyer, M. D., S. Campbell, D. Leach, and M. Coogan (2005). Collaboration: The Key to Success in
Transportation. Transportation Research Record, 1924: 153–162.

Abstract Index #: 736
LESSONS FROM MXD TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS OF TOD PROJECTS USING ENVISION TOMORROW SOFTWARE
Abstract System ID#: 507
Individual Paper
PANG, Hao [University of Texas at Austin] vicph2011@utexas.edu, presenting author, primary author
PATERSON, Robert [University of Texas at Austin] rgfp78704@gmail.com
The benefits of transit-oriented development (TOD) along public transit projects are well-studied; with several
studies indicating that TODs have substantial  land_use  impact in addition to effects on vehicle miles travelled
(VMTs), levels of congestion and mode shifting. A study in Austin (Zhang, 2010) using a four-step travel demand
model simulated traffic outcomes for TOD scenarios and found a 10-12 million reduction in VMTs. Another study
in Portland, Oregon, suggests that new residents of TODs reduced their vehicle ownership by about 30% and
increased their public transit use by almost 70% after relocating (Podobnik, 2002).
The ITE has a trip generation methodology that is common usage for traffic impact assessments, including an
updated version that take New Urbanist type influences into account. However, because these methods ignore
characteristics like density,  land_use diversity, pedestrian-oriented design, destination accessibility, distance to
transit, and residents of development, it has been asserted that it does not fully capture the traffic impact of built
environment. A review of eight smart growth trip generation methods found that all are more accurate than ITE
approach (Shafizadeh et al., 2011). Among them, the Ewing et al. (2011) study methodology produces the best
estimate for seven of the 22 sites used for validation.
Recently, Envision Tomorrow (ET+) scenario planning support system has become widely used in Austin. Projects
using this scenario planning software include the Sustainable Place Project, Project Connect (a LRT proposal
impact assessment) and CodeNEXT (a re-write of the Austin land development code to implement its new
comprehensive plan). As a GIS-based tool suite for scenario planning, ET applies Ewing et al. (2011) study
methodology as the basis for its trip generation and traffic impact assessment for study area under two square
miles.
Building off of previous research on the impact analysis of Project Connect, our study discusses the pros and cons
of ET+ approach for mode shift and trip generation aspects of TOD projects. By consulting with City of Austin, the
authors modeled over 50 project-specific building prototypes to feed into ET+ scenarios for the year of 2030. Two
scenarios are modeled: 1) A ‘No-Build’ scenario in which a high capacity transit line is not built; and 2) A ‘Build’
scenario in which a high capacity transit corridor is built. The study area is a 9-mile long corridor that stretches
from East Riverside Drive in South Austin to the Highland Mall area in North Austin, intersecting the eastern
portion of downtown Austin.

After modeling development scenarios using ET+, the mixed-use district (MXD) transportation model (Ewing and
Cervero, 2010) was applied to the  land_use scenarios in order to generate additional transportation benefit
estimates such as per capita VMT, share of walking and transit trips, transportation emissions, and monthly
transportation costs. For further understanding the impact assessment using ET+, three subareas were identified
- East Riverside, Highland Mall and Downtown Area, and one comparison analysis examines the strength and
limitation of this approach. While this research is on-going, our preliminary findings show that while the model
was useful in low transit service zones along the proposed rail line, its utility was more limited in area already
served by other modes of transit such as bus and BRT. The model is not sensitive to the impact of high capacity
transit as opposed to more traditional bus, in comparison with the impact of increased densification and TOD
 land_use. We discuss possible work around until future research allow for more precise differentiation of transit
type  impact in MXD TOD situations with pre-existing service.
References
 Zhang, M. (2010). Can transit-oriented development reduce peak-hour congestion? Transportation
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2174(1), 148-155.
 Podobnik, B. (2002). The Social and environment Achievements of New Urbanism: Evidence from
Orenco Station. Portland, Department of Sociology: Lewis and Clark College.
 Shafizadeh, K., Lee, R., Niemeier, D., Parker, T., & Handy, S. (2012). Evaluation of operation and accuracy
of available smart growth trip generation methodologies for use in California. Transportation Research
Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2307(1), 120-131.
 Ewing, R., & Cervero, R. (2010). Travel and the built environment: a meta-analysis. Journal of the
American planning association, 76(3), 265-294.
 Ewing, R., Greenwald, M., Zhang, M., Walters, J., Feldman, M., Cervero, R., Frank, L., & Thomas, J. (2010).
Traffic generated by mixed-use developments—six-region study using consistent built environment
measures. Journal of urban_planning and Development, 137(3), 248-261.

Abstract Index #: 737
THE EFFECTS OF THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT ON DRIVING EMISSIONS IN METROPOLITAN area IN THE US
Abstract System ID#: 512
Individual Paper
CHOI, Kwangyul [University of Texas at Austin] kwangyulc@utexas.edu
Growing concern over climate change has led to increasing interest in the role that the built environment can
play to cut down greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Many studies have reported that compact and mixed-use
developments reduce vehicle miles of travel (VMT). Others, however, argue that densification and mixture of
 land_uses can result in slower vehicle movements, and consequently generate more driving emissions. The net
effect is thus unclear. Methodologically, VMT is only a proxy, not an exact measure of emissions. This research
aims at improving understanding of the relationship between the built environment and driving emissions.
The study will utilize the 2009 National Household Travel Survey (NHTS) data to examine variations in the built
environmental characteristics and emissions among metropolitan area in the U.S. The NHTS includes detailed
information about the surveyed individuals’ trips and activities, as well as demographic and socio-economic
characteristics and vehicle information. Moreover, the NHTS add-on data include more detailed location
information about origins and destinations, which can be analyzed in conjunction with land-use data from other
agencies. The trip information will be utilized to estimate emission factors by the Motor Vehicle Emission
Simulator (MOVES), which is an emission modeling system developed by the environment Protection Agency
(EPA) to estimate various types of air pollution emissions from mobile sources. Using MOVES the study will
estimate GHG emissions considering vehicle type, age, speed, and cold-starts, in addition to VMT. By employing
structural equation modeling (SEM) techniques, this study describes how each aspect of the built environment
affects travel (e.g., distance and speed) and associated emissions.

This study is a part of my dissertation research.
References
 Brownstone, D. (2008). Key Relationships Between the Built Environment and VMT. Special Report 298:
Driving and the Built Environment: The Effects of Compact Development on Motorized Travel, Energy
Use, and CO2 Emissions.
 Liu, C., & Shen, Q. (2011). An empirical analysis of the influene of urban form on household travel and
energy consumption. Computers, Environment and Urban system, 35, 347-357.
 Ewing, R., Hamidi, S., Gallivan, F., Arthur, N. C., & Grace, J. B. (2014). Structural equation models of VMT
growth in US urbanised area. Urban Studies, 1-18.
 Hong, J., & Goodchild, A. (2014).  land_use policy and transportation emissions: Modeling the impact of trip
speed, vehicle characteristics and residential location. Transportation Research Part D, 26, 47-51.
 Hong, J., & Shen, Q. (2013). Residential density and transportation emissions: Examining the connection
by addressing spatial autocorrelation and self-selection. Transportation Research Part D, 22, 75-79.

Abstract Index #: 738
REDUCING VEHICLE TRAVEL FOR THE NEXT GENERATION: LESSONS FROM THE 2001 AND 2009 NHTSS
Abstract System ID#: 513
Individual Paper
JIAO, Junfeng [University of Texas at Austin] hkujjf@gmail.com, presenting author
CHOI, Kwangyul [University of Texas at Austin] kwangyulc@utexas.edu, primary author
ZHANG, Ming [University of Texas at Austin] zhangm@mail.utexas.edu
Background
The total number of Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT) in the U.S. reached its peak in 2007 and has continued to
decline (Polzin & Chu, 2014). Studies utilizing the National Household Travel Surveys (NHTSs) show that young
people, between the ages of 16 and 35, led to the meaningful decrease in vehicle travel (Santos et al., 2011). This
recent decrease is partly due to the increasing role of transportation alternatives (i.e., walking, cycling, and public
transit) technology (e.g. telecommuting) on travel (Mans et al., 2012).
Research Questions
Two specific questions are asked in this study. First, how travel behavior differs across different age groups over
time, and second, how the aforementioned factors affect the number of miles driven, and how the role of these
factors in travel varies across different age groups.
Data/Method
Utilizing multi-year NHTSs, this study examines the  impact of the use of transportation alternatives and
telecommuting on person vehicle miles of travel by age group over time. In order to capture the variances in the
impacts of each factor on the number of miles driven across different age groups, this study employs a
segmented regression method, also known as a piecewise regression, in which age groups were used as
breakpoints.
Results
The results of the regression analysis show that policy regarding public transit service can be more effective for
the 16-26 and 27-44 age groups to reduce vehicle travel. Additionally, improving the facilities for walking in favor
of the 45-63 age group can enhance policy effectiveness on VMT reduction. The effect of ICTs to reduce vehicle
trips is still unknown.
Conclusion
The findings of this study support the idea that improving public transit service and walking facilities in favor of
specific population subgroups can enhance policy effectiveness. These factors are also expected to play an
important role in reducing vehicle travel demand in the future.

References
 Santos, A., McGuckin, M., Nakamoto H. Y., Grey, D. and Liss, S. (2011). Summary of Travel Trends: 2009
National Household Travel Survey. Publication FHWA-PL-11-022. FHWA, U.S. Department of
Transportation.
 Polzin, S. E. and Chu, X. (2014). Peak VMT and Post Peak Consequences? Transportation Research
Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, unassigned.
 Mans, J., Interrante, E., Lem, L., Mueller, J., and Lawrence, M. (2012). Next Generation of Travel
Behavior: Potential  impact Related to Household Use of Information and Communication Technology.
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2323, 90-98.

Abstract Index #: 739
SOCIAL WELFARE ANALYSIS OF INVESTMENT PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP APPROACHES FOR
TRANSPORTATION PROJECTS
Abstract System ID#: 522
Individual Paper
M. ROUHANI, Omid [Cornell University] om67@cornell.edu
This paper has two objectives: (1) to introduce a new approach to gaining widespread support for comprehensive
road pricing; and (2) to develop a detailed social welfare analysis for road pricing schemes. We first describe a
new approach to garnering support for system-wide road pricing, which we refer to as an investment publicprivate partnership, or IP3. This approach returns a significant portion of the economic value created by road
pricing back to its citizen-owners. Next, we present a social welfare framework that estimates the benefits and
costs of using the IP3 approach on an urban transportation network. Policy makers typically evaluate publicprivate partnership (P3) projects using Value for Money (VfM) analysis. However, a P3 project’s impact on overall
social welfare provides a more comprehensive evaluation criterion. Apart from several theoretical studies, a
detailed social welfare analysis that includes all major P3 project stakeholders is lacking. Using Fresno City’s
transportation system as our case study, we show that system-optimal tolling scenarios favor average users, but
that government—and consequently taxpayers—would pay for costly tolling system. In contrast, unlimited
profit–maximizing tolls raise substantial profits for government, for the infrastructure’s citizen-owners, and for
the private sector, but the average user is worse off. From a social welfare perspective, one should search for a
Pareto-improvement under which all major stakeholders are better off. Our estimates indicate that a mixed
private and public tolling scheme offers such an improvement. A mixed scheme results in the highest social
welfare among all scenarios unless the weight placed on motorists’ (i.e., transportation users’) welfare is very low
or the weight placed on residents’ welfare is very high relative to the weight of other stakeholders.
References
 Geddes, R. R., Nentchev, D. N., 2013. Road Pricing and Asset Publicization: A New Approach to
Revitalizing U.S. Infrastructure, AEI Policy Brief, Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute
(December 2013), Available at: http://www.aei.org/files/2013/12/10/-road-pricing-and-assetpublicization_12592596596.pdf, Accessed August 4, 2014).
 Balducci, P., Shao, G., Amos, A., Rufolo, A., 2011. Costs of alternative revenue-generation system.
National Cooperative Highway Research Program-NCHRP REPORT 689, ISBN 978-0-309-21316-5.
 Boardman, A. E., Vining, A. R., 2012. The political economy of public-private partnerships and analysis of
their social value. Annals of Public and Cooperative Economics, 83(2), 117–141.
 Winston, C., Yan, J., 2011. Can privatization of U.S. highways improve motorists' welfare? Journal of
Public Economics, 95(7-8), 993–1005.

Abstract Index #: 740
MISSED BY THE MERCHANTS: PERCEIVED AND REPORTED CHOICE OF TRANSPORTATION MODE ON A
COMMERCIAL STREET

Abstract System ID#: 543
Individual Paper
TOKER, Zeynep [California State University Northridge] ztoker@csun.edu, presenting author, primary author
MINASSIANS, Henrik [California State University, Northridge] henrikmi@yahoo.com
Alternative modes of transportation, i.e. walking, bicycling, and public transit are becoming increasingly popular
in the United States. Recent changes proposed by Transportation Research Board to revise the concept of level of
service will help planners to model for road diets, which are interventions to street configurations improving the
infrastructure for pedestrians and bicyclists, such as adding bike lanes and wider sidewalks (Henderson 2011).
Combined with related state policy such as SB 375 in California, Sustainable comminuty Initiative, and county
wide policy such as Complete Streets Initiative in Los Angeles County, those improvements to pedestrian,
bicycle and public transit infrastructure are imminent in most city. These improvements are also argued to be
good for business although there is little evidence to support this argument. The purpose of this study was to
examine the business owners’ perception of their clients’ transportation mode, and residents’ and visitors’ selfreported transportation mode on such a commercial street. A total of 420 questionnaires were conducted with
the residents living within 0.25 mile of the commercial street; 100 surveys were administered to the randomly
selected pedestrians on the commercial street; and 99 businesses were selected randomly to be surveyed. Of the
420 residents 74% reported walking and 25% reported biking regularly to the commercial street. The findings
show that the most frequently visited businesses by these residents are restaurants and grocery stores. Similarly,
of the 100 visitors, 40% reported coming to the commercial street on foot or by bike, and 25% reported using
public transit. However, the business owners perceive that only 13% of their customers are bicyclists and
pedestrians, and specifically restaurants perceive that only 20% of their customers are bicyclists and pedestrians.
Such a gap between business owners’ perception and residents’ and visitors’ self-reporting might be attributed to
the choice of transportation mode by the business owners. Of the business owners 69% reported residing outside
of the neighborhood of the commercial street and driving to work. The mismatch between the business owners’
perception of their customers’ mode of transportation and the mode of transportation reported by the residents
and the visitors is the potential point of tension for improving pedestrian, bicycle and public transit
infrastructure.
References
 Henderson, J. (2011). Level of service: The politics of reconfiguring urban streets in San Francisco, ca.
Journal of transportation Geography, 19(6), 1138-1144.

Abstract Index #: 741
GHETTOS OR ENCLAVES? EVIDENCE ON SOCIAL NETWORKS BASED ON A RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ETHNIC
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE AND EXTERNAL-HOUSEHOLD CARPOOLS
Abstract System ID#: 557
Individual Paper
SHIN, Eun Jin [University of Southern California] eunjinsh@usc.edu
As racial segregation has been a persistent issue over the past several decades, understanding its  impact on the
travel behavior of minority groups becomes crucial. While several studies have investigated the relationship
between an ethnic enclave residency and immigrant travel behavior, the impact of residence in ethnic
communities on African-Americans’ travel behavior has rarely been discussed. Hence, in connection with a
theoretical discussion on ethnic enclaves and ghettos, I compare the impact of residence in Black comminuty on
African-American travel behavior with the impact of residence in ethnic enclaves on immigrant travel behavior.
Specifically, using the 2010-2012 California Household Travel Survey, I investigate whether living in an ethnic
community increases the probability of carpooling with non-household members among African-Americans, as
well as among immigrants. The multinomial logit results show that living in an ethnic enclave increases the
probability of external carpools among Asian/Hispanic immigrants, while this does not hold true for AfricanAmericans. Given the similar socioeconomic status between African-Americans and immigrants, this result

implies weaker ethnic networks among African-Americans residing in African-American comminuty compared
to those of immigrants living in ethnic enclaves. Therefore, this study adds to further evidence that living in
African-American comminuty might be an involuntary choice of the residents, whereas immigrants are more
likely to self-select to live in their co-ethnic comminuty.
References
 Blumenberg, E., & Smart, M. (2014). Brother can you Spare a Ride? Carpooling in Immigrant
Neighbourhoods. Urban Studies, 51(9), 1871-1890.
 Smart, M. J., & Klein, N. J. (2013). neighborhood of affinity: social forces and travel in gay and lesbian
neighborhoods. Journal of the American Planning Association, 79(2), 110-124.
 Liu, C. Y. (2009). Ethnic enclave residence, employment, and commuting of Latino workers. Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, 28(4), 600-625.
 Cutler, D. M., Glaeser, E. L., & Vigdor, J. L. (1999). The Rise and Decline of the American Ghetto. The
Journal of Political Economy, 107(3), 455-506.
 Charles, K. K., & Kline, P. (2006). Relational Costs and the Production of Social Capital: Evidence from
Carpooling*. The Economic Journal, 116(511), 581-604.

Abstract Index #: 742
STUDY ON IMPACT OF URBAN FORM ON AIR QUALITY IN CHINA: BASED ON PREFECTURAL LEVEL CITY
ANALYSIS
Abstract System ID#: 561
Individual Paper
ZHANG, Chun [Beijing Jiaotong University] zhangc@bjtu.edu.cn
Abstract: Recently a large scaled, long duration and highly polluted haze emerges in China, which raise research
interests from both scholars and decision makers. Accumulated researches on haze in China focus on the sources,
emission process and the weather condition for pollutants transformation. Since 1970s, the scholars in western
countries began to shift to the impact of urban form factors on air quality, which highlight that good urban
planning policy will benefit the air quality and public health in the long run. This paper tries to approach from the
perspective of urban form, and adopts regression model with control variables to evaluate the impact of urban
form factors on haze, with data from China City Year Book and China Environment, Economics and Energy Data
Set from 2001-2011. The results shows that small city with population less than 200,000, city outside of the
central heating area, and city in the east has lower PM 10 level. It also reveals more significant spatial autocorrelation pattern from 2003 to 2010. After control the scale, heating and east city, it finds that secondary
industry share, polluted industry scale, industrial consumption, population density and built-up area have
significant negative influence on air quality, while on the contrary public transit provision, green space and clean
energy consumption have significant positive influence on air quality. The results provide implications for urban
planners that policy toward good urban form help to promote the air quality and public health in the future,
such us optimizing  land_use structure, promoting public transit oriented development.

Abstract Index #: 743
STUDY ON SYNERGY DEVELOPMENT BETWEEN RAIL TRANSPORTATION AND URBAN SPACE IN CHINA
Abstract System ID#: 568
Individual Paper
XIA, Haishan [Beijing Jiaotong University] hshxia@bjtu.edu.cn, presenting author, primary author
ZHANG, Chun [Beijing Jiaotong University] zhangc@bjtu.edu.cn
China undergoes dramatically change in process of urbanization and urban spatial transformation in recent years,
while rail transportation infrastructure plays an important role on urban extension and urban spatial
restructuring. Through reviewing history on rail transportation development, and collecting data by questionnaire

on rail transportation related issues from 16 big city in three years, this paper tries to evaluate whether rail
transportation construction goes coordinate with urban spatial development. It measures the degree of
coordination by efficiency of rail transportation related space, social impact of rail transportation structure and
spatial influence on urban sprawl. Results show that the transportation space and other affiliate space are
currently under low efficiency. While improving the average commuting efficiency, it also lower the accessibility
for the dis-advantage group. In many city, transportation-led development also induce urban sprawl, especially
in the new suburban area and new zones. Despite these problem challenging sustainable rail transportation and
urban development, this paper provide implications for fast growing city globally in developing countries. Base
on these analysis, suggestions are brought up for the synergy development between rail transportation and
urban development in three aspects. First, the connectivity of rail transportation facility to urban space should be
promoted. Second, social impact of rail transportation will be further explored. Third, Planning tools should be
applied to control transportation-led urban sprawl.

Abstract Index #: 744
SUBSIDIZED HOUSING AND PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION OPPORTUNITIES IN neighborhood: CASE OF THE
GREATER LOS ANGELES AREA
Abstract System ID#: 596
Individual Paper
WOO, Ayoung [Texas A&M University] awoo@arch.tamu.edu, presenting author, primary author
JOH, Kenneth [Texas A & M University] kjoh@tamu.edu
The neighborhood and comminuty in which people live largely affect their various socioeconomic
opportunities for improved life outcomes and upward mobility (Crowley, 2003; Ellen & Turner, 1997; Massey &
Denton, 1993). Distressed neighborhood are commonly associated with poor education quality, inadequate
access to jobs, and high crime rates; advantaged comminuty are linked with quality education, high-paying jobs,
safety from crime, and healthier physical and social conditions (Squires& Kubrin, 2005; Van Zandt & Mhatre,
2009). These spatial distributions of needs, resources, and opportunities are termed the “geography of
opportunities (Briggs, 2005; Galster & Killen, 1995; Van Zandt & Mhatre, 2009).” Place is the key to explaining the
ecology of the uneven geography of opportunities – various socioeconomic opportunities and resources are
unevenly distributed between and within neighborhood, hence households have unequal access to those
opportunities and resources based on where they live (Briggs, 2005; Galster & Killen, 1995).
Subsidized housing program in the U.S. aim to provide affordable housing, decent homes, and suitable living
environments (Housing Act of 1949). The objective of subsidized housing program indicates that subsidized
housing policy consider the places matter for low-income families. Even though “decent homes” may refer to
the quality of housing structure, “suitable living environments” refers to neighborhood and comminuty which
promote various socioeconomic opportunities for improved life outcomes (Newman & Schnare, 1997; Oakley,
2008). Many studies have found that placed-based subsidized housing program have provided distressed
neighborhoods, especially in terms of poor socio-demographic conditions (i.e., high percentages of low-income
households, poverty, minorities, and unemployment), to subsidized households (Freeman, 2004; Kasarda, 1993;
Newman & Schnare, 1997; Van Zandt & Mhatre, 2009). However, we have empirically limited understanding as
to whether place-based subsidized housing developments promote locational options that offer better public
transportation opportunities for low-income families.
This paper address a simple question: do placed-based subsidized housing developments provide public
transportation access for the disadvantaged populations, and how does public transportation opportunities in
neighborhoods vary by type of federal subsidy (i.e., public housing and LIHTC)? The study area is the greater Los
Angeles region, which comprise the Los Angeles CSA. We use data from the Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD)’s 2010 Picture of Subsidized Households to identity the location of placed-based subsidized
housing developments. Also, the 2010 decennial census data and the 2006-2010 American Community Survey 5year estimates are used to specify the socio-demographic characteristics of neighborhood. To identify the public
transportation access in neighborhood, we use data on transit stops and stations in the greater Los Angeles area

obtained with permission from the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG). For our analysis
examining the relationships between subsidized households and transit density, we consider a transit stop in
neighborhoods as a scheduled stop on every directional fixed-route bus or rail line because transit access can be
representative of a proxy for transit service. All data are aggregated to census block group level to identify the
subsidized housing, socio-demographic, and transportation access conditions of neighborhood. We employ two
empirical methods, especially the bivariate analysis including descriptive statistics and t-test, and the multiple
regression analysis to explore the spatial discrepancies between the location of subsidized households and the
transit access in neighborhood. Our findings will help policy makers understand whether placed-based
subsidized housing is developed in neighborhood where provide better access to public transportation for the
disadvantaged populations.
Abstract Index #: 745
HOW MID-SIZED city CAN SECURE INTERNATIONAL FLIGHTS AND STIMULATE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN
THE NEW ERA OF OPEN SKIES AND AIRLINE INCENTIVE program
Abstract System ID#: 650
Individual Paper
RYERSON, Megan [University of Pennsylvania] mryerson@design.upenn.edu
The relationship between air traffic and economic development is both undeniable and hard to quantify. Scholars
have identified the relationship between economic variables (such as employment and wages) and air traffic at a
single airport (such as Brueckner, 2003), across all airports in a region or state (Button, Doh, and Yuan, 2010), or
across a nation-wide sample of airports (Green, 2007). While parsing out the effects of international traffic alone
on regional economic development is a challenging – if not untenable – endeavor, the correlation is undeniable.
Indeed, Button and Taylor (2000) review historical city planning documents and note that the presence of
international air service is listed among the top factors that international and domestic firms consider when
deciding office and headquarter siting.
Luring air traffic, both international and domestic, has long been in the realm of city officials and planners as
operators of municipal airports. As city have historically maintained a “build it and they will come” mentality
regarding their municipal owned and operated airports, airport sponsors have relied on the one tool in their
toolkit to promote economic development through their airport: airport expansion (Garrison 2014; Ryerson and
Woodburn 2014). Yet expansion is an imperfect – and expensive – tool, as evidenced by the major airports in
cities such as Cleveland, Pittsburgh, and Cincinnati that that lost air service after expanding due to the changing
business patterns of the airlines that served them. In the past 10 years, two major policy changes have combined
to add a second mechanism through which airport sponsors can build their international service with the goal of
economic development. The first development is in the form of liberalized bi-lateral agreements across countries
which allow international and US domestic airlines to engage in profit and risk sharing for international flights.
The second is new policy issued by the Federal Aviation Administration outlining the mechanism through which
airport sponsors can use airport funds to incentivize new international service at their airports. These two policy
changes have opened the door for city to court airlines and encourage them to launch new international
service. Certainly the expected occurred: the largest metropolitan area such as New York, Philadelphia, and Los
Angeles were successful in luring new international flights to Asian and European destinations. But something
less expected, and untested, also occurred: many airports outside of the major metropolitan area such as
Raleigh-Durham, NC, Portland, OR, and Austin, TX were able to attract brand-new international transatlantic or
transpacific service.
In the following study, I seek to categorize metropolitan area and their airports regarding how well they are
positioned to secure new international service. To do so, I first identify the major factors that led city to be
successful or unsuccessful in luring and retaining international service. Using statistical techniques I identify the
three most critical factors that explain a region’s propensity to have an international flight: the percent of the
workforce that is employed in service-level professions; the Gross Metropolitan Product (GMP); and the number
of flights during the airport’s peak period. I then use cluster analysis, which is a statistical method that in this case
identifies categories of metropolitan area based on how similar they are on our three factors, to define groups

of metropolitan area. For each group, I explore how well they are positioned to secure a new international flight
based on their employment, GMP, and quantity of flights; their history; and the success or failure of incentive
programs and other interventions they have made to encourage service.
References
 Brueckner, Jan K. 2003. “Airline Traffic and Urban Economic Development.” Urban Studies 40 (8): 1455–
69. doi:10.1080/0042098032000094388.
 Button, Kenneth, and Samantha Taylor. “International Air Transportation and Economic Development.”
Journal of Air transportation Management 6, no. 4 (October 2000): 209–22. doi:10.1016/S09696997(00)00015-6.
 Button, Kenneth, Soogwan Doh, and Junyang Yuan. 2010. “The Role of Small Airports in Economic
Development.” Journal of Airport Management 4 (2). http://trid.trb.org/view.aspx?id=924327.
 Garrison, William L., and David M. Levinson. 2014. The Transportation Experience: Policy, Planning, and
Deployment. 2 edition. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
 Ryerson, M.S., Woodburn, A. (2014). Build Capacity or Manage Demand: Can regional planners lead
American aviation into a new frontier of demand management? Journal of the American Planning
Association, 80(2), 138-152.

Abstract Index #: 746
DISTANCES, DESTINATIONS, AND TRAVEL DECISIONS: EXPLORING ACCESS TO PUBLIC TRANSIT FOR OLDER
ADULTS IN NEW HAVEN, CONNECTICUT
Abstract System ID#: 652
Individual Paper
NEGAHDARIKIA, Paria [University at Buffalo, SUNY] parianeg@buffalo.edu, presenting author, primary author
HESS, Daniel [University at Buffalo, State University of New York] dbhess@buffalo.edu
Growth in the number and proportion of older adults is unprecedented in the history of the United States. Longer
life spans and aging baby boomers will combine to double the population of Americans aged 65 years or older
during the next 25 years (Rosenbloom, 2001; Alsnih and Hensher, 2003). Access and mobility are key concerns.
When older adults lose their ability to drive, or cannot easily secure rides from others, they suffer substantial
losses in mobility (Rosenbloom, 2003). Inadequate access to transportation for older adults results in lower levels
of physical activity, reduced independence, and greater health risks (Hess, 2009; Preston, 2007).
Since older adults drive less frequently and already experience more isolation, barriers to mobility further limit
their engagement, participation, and independence. Public rights‐of‐way (ROW) often create disincentives to
walking and pose risk for injury, decreased mobility, and increased isolation among older adults (Maisel, 2014;
Lynott et al., 2009). While older adults have poorer access to public transit compared to other Americans, public
transit nevertheless plays a substantial role in helping older adults stay mobile.
To extend the current research on challenges that older adults face using public transit, we propose to explore
the process of decision making about using transit and various contributing factors, including the distance
between an origin and destination, availability of a transit stop or station, walking distance to public transit,
presence of sidewalks, and the quality of pedestrian environment (Hess, 2009; Rodriquez and Joonwon, 2003,
Zhao et al., 2003). To explore these relationships, we use the 2012 Greater New Haven Community Wellbeing
Survey to address the following research questions:
• What are the factors affecting transit ridership for older adults?
• Is public transit a convenient mode of transportation for older adults’ daily needs? Why? Or, why not? This
survey of 1,307 Greater New Haven Connecticut residents includes 494 respondents age 65 years or
older. Using multiple variable regression analysis of survey responses, we explore these complex
dimensions of travel for older adults:
• Mind-set challenges: a product of the freedom and independence associated with driving;

•
•

Destination challenges: describing the challenge of getting to desired locations;
Mobility challenges: connected to the efforts to access various services.

The results of our multiple variable models of older adults’ public transit riding tendencies and decision making
will provide insight for transportation policy makers. Our research will suggest policy and spatial area that
require attention and resources to meet the growing travel needs of older adults. The findings will lead to a set of
policy recommendations for use in New Haven and elsewhere that include interventions in the built environment
and changes in how transit policy makers perceive mobility needs of older adults.
References
 Alsnih, R., & Hensher, D. A. (2003). The mobility and accessibility expectations of seniors in an aging
population. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 37(10), 903-916.
 Evans, E. L. (2001). Influences on mobility among non-driving older Americans. Transportation Research
Circular E-C026, 151-168.
 Hess, D. B. (2009). Access to public transit and its influence on ridership for older adults in two US city.
Journal of transportation and  land_use, 2(1).
 Lynott, J., Haase, J., Nelson, K., Taylor, A., Twaddell, H., Ulmer, J., ... & Stollof, E. R. (2009). Planning
complete streets for an aging America (No. 2009-02).
 Rosenbloom, S. (2001). Sustainability and automobility among the elderly: An international assessment.
Transportation, 28(4), 375-408.

Abstract Index #: 747
NETWORK EVOLUTION AND TERRITORIAL TRANSFORMATION IN HONG KONG: AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS ON
RAILWAY INVESTMENT, EMPLOYMENT LOCATION, AND HOUSING PROVISION
Abstract System ID#: 654
Individual Paper
MURAKAMI, Jin [City University of Hong Kong] admin@jinmurakami.net
Hong Kong is well recognized for its world-class railway and property development (Cervero and Murakami,
2009). In particular, MTR Corporation’s unique land value capture techniques (so-called “Rail Plus Property” or
R+P programme) have long been adapted to finance major capital works without government cash subsidies and
guide Hong Kong’s territorial development in a sustainable way since the early 1980s (Suzuki et al., 2015).
Although the existing literature admits the significant success of MTR Corporation’s transit finance, property
business, and town planning model from the past experience, there will be even greater policy challenges with
respect to Hong Kong’s network evolution and territorial transformation for the coming decades. Indeed, Hong
Kong’s current intracity and intercity railway extension projects, including the on-going “Guangzhou–Shenzhen–
Hong Kong Express Rail Link (XRL)”, already requires more governmental funding arrangements, such as , due in
large part to the changing nature of network extensions and the lack of developable land around new stations,
whereas the latest territorial development strategy up to year 2030 stresses the increased importance of
intercity interactions with Mainland China and the growing demand for “Grade A” office and affordable housing
properties in enhancing both global competitiveness and local livability along the new railway lines. In response
to such network evolution and territorial transformation trend and projection, this study empirically examines (1)
changes in both intracity and intercity railway networks and travel times across Hong Kong and Mainland China;
(2) a series of MTR’s high-end property developments; (3) provisions of government housing units, rental flats,
and shopping plazas within 500 meters of stations; (4) dynamic shifts in employment locations and job-housing
balance across 200+ Tertiary Planning Units -TPUs; and (5) increases in MTR’s system-wide ridership and modal
share along with network changes, property provisions, and location shifts over the past ten to twenty years.
Evidence derived from this time-series geographic data analysis would reveal the economic potential and
unintended consequences of major investment in intercity transportation facilities and intracity missing links that
could support cross-border interactions and business clusters but might exacerbate the spatial divisions of labor
and traffic congestion accompanied by the provisions of high-end commercial properties and affordable housing
units within Hong Kong. Specific infrastructure and  land_use planning implications are drawn not only to Hong

Kong’s railway investment and territorial development strategies but also those for a few selected global city of
the world, including the United States.
References
 Cervero, Robert, and Jin Murakami. “Rail and Property Development in Hong Kong: Experiences and
Extensions.” Urban Studies 46, no. 10 (August 14, 2009): 2019–2043. doi:10.1177/0042098009339431.
 Suzuki, Hiroaki, Jin Murakami., Yu-Hun Hong, and Beth Tamayose. Financing Transit-Oriented
Development with Land Values: Adapting Development-based Land Value Capture in Developing
Countries. Washington, DC, USA: The World Bank Publications (2015).
 Monkkonen, Paavo, and Xiaohu Zhang. "Innovative measurement of spatial segregation: Comparative
evidence from Hong Kong and San Francisco." Regional Science and Urban Economics 47 (2014): 99-111.
 Hou, Quan, and Si-Ming Li. "Transport infrastructure development and changing spatial accessibility in
the Greater Pearl River Delta, China, 1990–2020." Journal of transportation Geography 19, no. 6 (2011):
1350-1360.
 Wang, Jiaoe, Fengjun Jin, Huihui Mo, and Fahui Wang. "Spatiotemporal evolution of China’s railway
network in the 20th century: An accessibility approach." Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
Practice 43, no. 8 (2009): 765-778.

Abstract Index #: 748
EXPLORING THE INTERRELATIONSHIPS AMONG SOCIO-DEMOGRAPHICS, URBAN FORM, ACTIVITY TRAVEL
PATTERNS, AND VEHICLE MILES TRAVELED
Abstract System ID#: 657
Individual Paper
CHEN, YuJen [The Ohio State University] chen.1571@osu.edu, presenting author, primary author
AKAR, Gulsah [Ohio State University] akar.3@osu.edu
Research about people’s activity travel patterns and vehicle miles traveled (VMT) have received much attention
in recent decades. The activity travel patterns are known for greatly affecting VMT, and VMT has been viewed as
one of the key contributors to traffic congestion, energy consumption, greenhouse gas emissions, and
environmental quality. Previous studies established that some socio-demographics and urban form factors have
significant  impact on the activity travel patterns and VMT. However, the causal relationships among these
variables still remain unclear. Using 2012 travel survey data from the Cleveland metropolitan area, this study
aims to investigate the connections between VMT, joint trip making, and trip chaining making controlling for
socio-demographics and urban form. Joint trip making and trip chaining capture the complexity of activity travel
patterns. The urban form is measured by population and employment density, transportation connectivity, and
regional accessibility at tour origins (i.e. home locations) and destinations. The Structural Equation Model (SEM)
is applied to estimate the interrelationships among these exogenous and endogenous variables. The model
results reveal that (1) the significant direct effects with expected signs exist among three endogenous variables,
trip chaining, joint trip making, and VMT, (2) the socio-demographic variables are strong explanatory factors of
VMT, joint trip making, and trip chaining, which are consistent with previous studies (Lin & Wang, 2014; Liu,
2012; Van Acker & Witlox, 2011; Vovsha, Petersen, & Donnelly, 2003), (3) some of the personal and household
characteristics have indirect effects on VMT through the two activity travel patterns, (4) the urban form
measurements at the origins and destinations have significant effects on joint trip making and trip chaining,
which affect the VMT indirectly, (5) the urban form variables at tour origins are found to influence VMT more
than those at the tour destinations. These findings will improve the future design of transportation policy by
gaining additional insights on the links between socio-demographics, urban form, activity travel patterns, and
VMT.
References
 Lin, T., & Wang, D. (2014). Social networks and joint/solo activity–travel behavior. Transportation
Research Part A: policy and practice, 68, 18-31.





Liu, C. (2012). Exploring the influence of urban form on travel and energy consumption, using structural
equation modeling: UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, COLLEGE PARK.
Van Acker, V., & Witlox, F. (2011). Commuting trips within tours: how is commuting related to  land_use?
Transportation, 38(3), 465-486.
Vovsha, P., Petersen, E., & Donnelly, R. (2003). Explicit modeling of joint travel by household members:
statistical evidence and applied approach. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the
Transportation Research Board, 1831, 1-10.

Abstract Index #: 749
SHOULD WE ALL JUST STAY HOME? TRAVEL, OUT-OF-HOME ACTIVITIES, AND LIFE SATISFACTION
Abstract System ID#: 662
Individual Paper
MORRIS, Eric [Clemson University] emorri7@clemson.edu
Much work has examined the costs of travel such as emissions, crashes, monetary expense, and time loss. But, in
large part because it is difficult to measure, travel’s benefits are largely understudied. This is a noteworthy
lacuna, because without an understanding of these benefits we are not fully informed when examining the
impacts of policy to facilitate, reshape, or discourage travel. To date, no studies have looked at individuals’ life
satisfaction and its links with overall time spent traveling using a large and representative sample, while also
disaggregating by mode and travel purpose. This paper utilizes data from the American Time Use Survey, which in
2012 and 2013 asked subjects to rate the overall quality of their lives. Although there are limitations and caveats
involved with such a measure, it has been validated in numerous ways and thus this approach is widely used by
happiness scholars. Using ordinary least squares and ordered logit regression, this study finds that, controlling for
relevant demographic, geographic, and temporal covariates, the amount of travel time per day is significantly and
positively associated with life satisfaction. This relationship is attenuated, but still significant, when time spent
participating in out-of-home activities is controlled for, suggesting that more travel helps us to access betterquality destinations, not simply more destinations. Time spent bicycling is strongly associated with higher life
satisfaction, though it attains borderline significance only in some models; time spent walking is also positive,
though it is not significant. These tentative findings of a link between active travel and happiness may be due to
active travel having emotional or health benefits. Life satisfaction is positively and significantly associated with
travel for the purposes of eating and drinking, religious activities, volunteering, and playing and watching sports.
Travel time exhibits a strong positive relationship with life satisfaction in less populous places, but in large MSAs
the association weakens; this may be due to the time or emotional costs of traffic congestion, which
disproportionately exists in large city, or to the fact that many desirable destinations in large city may be more
dispersed. (In this sample, overall travel time is positively correlated with MSA size.) In all, while the associations
between travel and life satisfaction are clear, the causal story is complex, with the positive relationship
potentially being explained by 1) travel allowing us to access destinations that make us happy, 2) the act of travel
itself being fulfilling, 3) intrinsically happier people being more likely to travel, and/or 4) the presence of
confounding variables, such as personality traits like extraversion or being open to new experiences, which have
been shown to increase life satisfaction and in all probability also increase the propensity to travel. In all
likelihood, all four factors are at play, but the evidence here suggests that explanation 1 is a significant
contributing factor. In sum, the findings provide support for the proposition that the benefits of travel outweigh
its burdens, at least for the individual traveler, and that, despite its very real costs, the provision of transportation
resources is very likely facilitating human happiness.
References
 De Vos, Jonas, Tim Schwanen, Veronique Van Acker, and Frank Witlox. 2013. “Travel and Subjective
Well-Being: A Focus on Findings, Methods and Future Research Needs.” transportation Reviews 33 (4): 421–
42. doi:10.1080/01441647.2013.815665.
 Delbosc, Alexa. 2012. “The Role of Well-Being in transportation Policy.” transportation Policy 23 (September): 25–
33. doi:10.1016/j.tranpol.2012.06.005.





Ettema, Dick, Tommy Gärling, Lars E. Olsson, and Margareta Friman. 2010. “Out-of-Home Activities,
Daily Travel, and Subjective Well-Being.” Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 44 (9): 723–
32. doi:10.1016/j.tra.2010.07.005.
Nordbakke, Susanne, and Tim Schwanen. 2014. “Well-Being and Mobility: A Theoretical Framework and
Literature Review Focusing on Older People.” Mobilities 9 (1): 104–29.
doi:10.1080/17450101.2013.784542.

Abstract Index #: 750
EXPLORING FACTORS AFFECTING METRORAIL RIDERSHIP IN WASHINGTON D.C.: AN APPLICATION OF
GEOGRAPHICALLY WEIGHTED REGRESSION
Abstract System ID#: 682
Individual Paper
LIU, Chao [University of Maryland] cliu8@umd.edu
In order to evaluate the effectiveness of investment in public transportation and transit oriented development
(TOD), it is important to understand critical factors that affect transit demand at the station level. Recently, Direct
Ridership Model (DRM) has been increasingly used to estimate transit ridership demand for its advantage for
applications in practice. DRM estimates ridership as a function of the built environment, transit services, and
demographic characteristics around station area, rather than using mode choice model or traditional travel
demand model (Kuby et al., 2004; Chu, 2004; Cervero, 2006). The current DRMs based on ordinary least squares
regression (OLS) assume the relationships between dependent and independent variables are constant across
space, resulting in the average regression coefficients for all the stations. However, the relationships between
various factors and transit ridership could vary among stations. Some factors may have a strong prediction power
at certain stations and have a weak impact at other stations. GWR can capture spatial variations in the regression
coefficients for a given station (Gutiérrez, Javier et al., 2011). GWR can develop as many “spatially adjusted”
regressions as there are stations, based on the concept of distance decay (where more weight is given to closer
stations than the farther ones). GWR can also predict ridership for a given station if certain  land_use scenarios
need to be tested before implementation.
Washington Metrorail is the largest and most-heavily utilized transit system that delivers more than 1.2 million
trips each day to a population of 4.6 million in the Washington D.C. region (WMATA, 2013). It provides economic,
social, and environment benefits that contribute to the region’s vitality. Washington Metropolitan Area Transit
Authority (WMATA) is interested in  land_uses adjacent to its Metrorail stations for several reasons. One of the
major goals stated in the WMATA’s Long-range Plan is to reduce overcrowding of trains and stations, for which
future  land_use decisions around the Metrorail stations and related transit ridership change will have substantial
implications. In some case,  land_uses around stations can exercerbate a mismatch between station capacity and
usage, triggering the need for capital improvement at certain stations. Finally, increasing walk access to Metrorail
can be another effective way to use existing infrastructure more efficiently to generate more ridership and
revenue. Development of more fine-tuned DRMs will benefit WMATA for their examination of policy alternatives
aiming at reducing overcrowding, balancing the capacity and usage, and increasing ridership and revenue.
In this study, we propose to develop DRMs by using both OLS and GWR approaches. Data for 86 Metrorail
stations will be gathered from a variety of sources including WMATA, U.S. Census, U.S. environment Protection
Agency (EPA), and National Center for Smart Growth (NCSG). Data will be categorized into three groups including:
transit service characteristics, station built environment features (density, diversity, design, and accessibility), and
demographic variables. In order to better capture the  land_use patterns around metro stations, a series of “walk
sheds” will be created around each station, using the actual walkable network rather than a catchment area “as
the crow fly.” Then station built environment features and demographic data will be merged to these “walk
sheds.” Results obtained from both OLS and GWR models will be compared. Potential policy implications will be
discussed.

References
 Cervero, R. (2006). Alternative approaches to modeling the travel-demand  impact of smart growth.
Journal of the American Planning Association 72(3).
 Chu, X., 2004. Ridership Models at the Stop Level. National Center of Transit Research, University of
South Florida.
 Gutiérrez, Javier, Osvaldo Daniel Cardozo, and Juan Carlos García-Palomares. (2011). Transit ridership
forecasting at station level: an approach based on distance-decay weighted regression.Journal of
Transport Geography 19.6: 1081-1092.
 Kuby, M., A. Barranda, and C. Upchurch. 2004. Factors influencing light-rail station boardings in the
United States. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, Vol. 38, No. 3, 223–247.
 Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority. 2013. Momentum: The Next Generation of Metro
Strategic Plan 2013-2025.

Abstract Index #: 751
IDENTIFYING CAUSES OF TRANSIT AND  land_use COORDINATION SHORTCOMINGS THROUGH PRACTITIONER
REFLECTION
Abstract System ID#: 686
Individual Paper
CARLTON, Ian [University of Oklahoma] icarlton@ou.edu
Through interviews with more than 50 transit project planners across 19 U.S. regions, I have developed a number
of hypotheses regarding why ineffective theories persist in the realm of transit and  land_use coordination. Many
of the planners I interviewed were disappointed in the amount of real estate development that had resulted
around transit projects they had planned—particularly when they had advocated for costly transit project design
alternatives they believed would foster real estate development (Carlton, 2013). When reflecting with these
planners on their practices, I learned that their expectations of real estate development were often based on
theories that appeared to be oversimplified and overgeneralized versions of what the academic literature says
about the topic.
Planners mostly engaged in rationalization during our conversations, only rarely critiquing the effectiveness of
their theories or considering the potential usefulness of alternative theories. While rationalization to avoid
culpability or change is common human behavior, Argyris and Schon’s (1974) theory of practice suggests that
learning by doing occurs when practitioners avoid rationalization and critically reflect on the effectiveness of their
practices. Such “single-loop” learning allows for incremental improvement over time and the attainment of
expertise. So, why did transit planners not engage in single-loop learning regarding their disappointment in real
estate development around the projects they planned?
These transit planners’ failure to engage in reflective learning appeared to be justified by several institutional
factors. For example, federal policy language includes, and therefore validates, many of the oversimplified
theories used by planners. Additionally, many planners suggested that our conversation was the first time they
had thoroughly considered real estate outcomes. It seemed that the planners had been distracted from any real
estate development shortcomings because they had achieved success as transit planners by designing politically
acceptable transit investments, implementing  land_use plans around proposed stations, delivering transit
projects, and garnering significant federal transportation funds—goals that appeared more salient in our
conversations than  land_use changes around the projects they helped build. In fact, while federal policy require
funding applicants to consider real estate development during the planning phase, federal funding requirements
require ex-post evaluations of project costs and ridership but not a performance evaluation of station area real
estate development.
For such reasons, I hypothesize that single loop learning in transit and  land_use coordination will not be
accomplished until institutional changes incentivize reflection and allow for adaptation. Until then, the practices
that result from oversimplified and overgeneralized theories will persist and continue to hamper transit planners’

ability to achieve their goals of fostering station area real estate development. U.S. transit projects will continue
to incur opportunity costs as limited transit capital funds are expended ineffectively.
References
 Argyris, Chris, and Donald A. Schon. 1974. Theory in Practice: Increasing Professional Effectiveness. 1st
ed. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
 Flyvbjerg, Bent, Todd Landman, and Sanford Schram. 2012. Real Social Science: Applied Phronesis.
Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press.
 Hamer, Andrew. 1976. The Selling of Rail Rapid Transit: A Critical Look at Urban Transportation Planning.
Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books.
 Wachs, Martin. 1989. “When Planners Lie with Numbers.” Journal of the American Planning Association
Vol. 55 (No. 4): 476–79.
 Schon, Donald A, and Martin Rein. 1994. Frame Reflection: Toward the Resolution of Intractable Policy
Controversies. New York: BasicBooks.

Abstract Index #: 752
SCOFFLAW CYCLING: BEHAVIOR, INTENTION, AND MULTI-MODAL INTERACTIONS
Abstract System ID#: 696
Pre-organized Session: Making Cycling Mainstream
PIATKOWSKI, Daniel [Savannah State University] piatkowskid@savannahstate.edu, presenting author, primary
author
MARSHALL, Wesley [University of Colorado, Denver] Wesley.Marshall@ucdenver.edu
Bicyclists have an image problem. The popular media, everyday discourse, and even some transportation
professionals criticize cyclists for their ignorant or indifferent attitudes toward the “rules of the road.” Seemingly
unconcerned with traffic laws that apply to other road users, cyclists run red lights and stop signs, ride in groups
impeding motorized traffic, and are generally thought to bring disorder and danger to otherwise safe and orderly
streets with their scofflaw behavior. Whether valid or not, portrayals of cyclists as thrill-seekers and outlaws
rather than ordinary road users can engender social stigma and resentment among pedestrians and drivers
(Daley & Rissel, 2011). This mindset may adversely affect bicycle promotion efforts by increasing barriers to
cycling among the general population, or worse, it may incite dangerous conflicts (e.g., “road rage” incidents)
between cyclists and other road users (O’Connor & Brown, 2010). Yet, the legitimacy of the scofflaw cyclist trope
has not been assessed empirically. We address this gap in the literature in two ways. First, we examine the
validity of the “scofflaw cyclist” trope by quantifying and describing the behavior, including underlying behavioral
rationales. Second, we explore the broader issues surrounding interactions and conflicts between modes in car
dominated environments and the resulting implications for promoting bicycling.
Central to this research is identifying conflicting perspectives on appropriate behavior across all road users,
particularly where normative and lawful bicycling behavior is ambiguous or dangerous. To do this, we use data
drawn from an online survey combining stated preference questions with photo-enhanced hypothetical
scenarios. Presented with common roadway situations, respondents were asked to take the perspective of a
driver, pedestrian, or cyclist, and report: i) how they would navigate the situation; and ii) their rationale for this
choice. Scenarios measure willingness to engage in scofflaw behavior and resulting inter-modal conflicts.
Respondents were convenience-sampled via email, social media, and the popular press. The resulting dataset
includes over 16,800 unique responses from across the United States and Canada.
To examine the validity of the “scofflaw cyclist” trope, we first specify scofflaw bicycling behavior in terms of who
behaves in scofflaw ways, in which situations they exhibit these behaviors, and underlying rationales for such
behaviors. Findings indicate scofflaw cycling behavior can be grouped along two extremes. At one extreme, there
are cyclists that tend toward assertive behavior; such cyclists are frequently perceived as rude and/or reckless by
other users, even when exhibiting lawful behavior (Skinner & Rosen 2007). At the other extreme are risk-averse

cyclists. For these cyclists, scofflaw behavior is symptomatic of conflict-avoidance rather than an assertion of
spatial dominance in mixed traffic.
Our analysis also addresses issues of multi-modal interactions, conflicts, and implications for bicycle promotion.
We find support for the hypothesis that personalities are constant across modes. The absence of multi-modal
infrastructure, however, is correlated with reduced cyclist safety (Pucher, et al., 2010) and increased
stigmatization of bicyclists (Aldred, 2012), creating an environment that may induce scofflaw behavior. In
contrast, risk-prone or risk-averse drivers have the flexibility to behave within their ‘comfort zone’ in autooriented environments. Additionally, as scofflaw cycling behavior tends to cluster at opposite extremes, so do
driver’s reactions to this behavior.
Findings should be interpreted cautiously, given the non-representative population; however, our results have
broad implications for increasing bicycling in auto-dependent comminuty. Scofflaw cycling behavior is certainly
rampant in the United States, but so is scofflaw driving, and scofflaw walking. Planners and advocates have
suggested that this is the case in the US, but this research is the first of its kind to specify the type, extent, and
motivation behind scofflaw behavior.
References
 Aldred, R. (2012). Incompetent or Too Competent? Negotiating Everyday Cycling Identities in a Motor
Dominated Society. Mobilities, 8(2), 252-271.
 Daley, M., & Rissel, C. (2011). Perspectives and Images of Cycling as a Barrier or Facilitator of Cycling.
Transport Policy, 18(1), 211-216.
 O’Connor, J. & Brown, T. (2010). Riding with Sharks: Serious Leisure Cyclist’s Perceptions of Sharing the
Road with Motorists. Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport, 13(1), 53-58.
 Pucher, J., Dill, J., & Handy, S. (2010). Infrastructure, program, and policy to Increase Bicycling: An
International Review. Preventive Medicine, 50, S106-S125.
 Skinner, D. and Rosen P. 2007. "Hell Is Other Cyclists: Rethinking transportation Identity." Pp. 83-96 in Cycling
and Society, edited by D. Horton, P. Rosen and P. Cox. Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.

Abstract Index #: 753
AT WHAT DENSITY DOES TRANSIT BECOME GREENER THAN PRIVATE VEHICLES? CARBON-EFFICIENT
THRESHOLDS OF URBAN POPULATION DENSITY
Abstract System ID#: 698
Individual Paper
LEE, Bumsoo [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] bumsoo@illinois.edu, presenting author, primary
author
LEE, Sungwon [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] lee491@illinois.edu
Promoting public transit is often proposed as a critical strategy to mitigate greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in
the transportation sector which accounts for about one-fifth of total emissions in the U.S. However, transit had
been losing market share to private vehicles throughout the second half of the 20th century until the recent
uptick in transit ridership perhaps due to an unprecedented increase in gasoline prices and cumulated transit
investments. A primary cause of failing transit had been declining population densities in U.S. city (Angel, Blei,
Parent, & Civco, 2011). In many parts of U.S. urban area, population densities are so low that a mass transit
mode, typically bus service, generates more carbon dioxide per passenger mile than private vehicles due to low
occupancy rates (Lee & Lee, 2014).
This paper will propose a notion of carbon-efficient thresholds of urbanized area (UA) population density at
which public transit becomes a more sustainable mode than automobiles and will estimate the density thresholds
for various sizes and types of UAs based on an empirical analysis. In our view, the notion of ‘optimal city size’,
which once fascinated urban researchers, is an intellectual dead end. We argue that planners and policy makers
can better manage the way a city grows than how big for a city to grow. Comparing carbon emissions per

passenger mile from transit system and personal vehicles will offer important reference points for desirable
urban population densities in light of climate change.
For an empirical analysis, we will use the National Transit Database (NTD) which compiles the most extensive
data on the public transit system in U.S. city: capital and operating funding, operating expenses, transit service
supplied by mode, and transit use by mode. We will estimate UA level emission factors per passenger mile, using
annual energy consumption of transit agencies by source and mode, total passenger miles, and CO2 emission
factors by energy source. We will conduct multivariate analyses to establish a linear or non-linear relationship
between UA density and carbon-efficiency of the transit system given the current energy and technology
portfolio, while controlling for other complicating factors.
References
 Angel, Shlomo, Blei, Alejandro, Parent, Jason, & Civco, Daniel A. (2011). The decline in transit-sustaining
densities in U.S. city, 1910-2000. In G. K. Ingram & Y.-H. Hong (Eds.), Climate Change and Land policy
(pp. 191-212). Cambridge, MA: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.
 Lee, Sungwon, & Lee, Bumsoo. (2014). The influence of urban form on GHG emissions in the U.S.
household sector. Energy Policy, 68(0), 534-549.
 Capello R, Camagni R, 2000, "Beyond optimal city size: an evaluation of alternative urban growth
patterns" Urban Studies 37 1479-1496.
 Newman P, Kenworthy J, 2006, "Urban Design to Reduce Automobile Dependence" Opolis 2.
 Galster G C, Quercia R G, Cortes A, 2000, "Identifying neighborhood thresholds: An empirical
exploration" Housing Policy Debate 11 701-732.

Abstract Index #: 754
TRANSPORTATION IN AN AGING SOCIETY: AN ANALYSIS OF OLDER PEDESTRIAN CRASHES
Abstract System ID#: 700
Pre-organized Session: Traffic Safety Planning
KIM, Sungyop [University of Missouri - Kansas City] kims@umkc.edu
Mobility is one of the most significant factors associated with successful aging. With an increasing aging
population, there is a growing need to understand travel behavior and transportation alternatives of older adults.
Personal automobile has been the predominant mode of travel among older adults. However, cognitive and/or
physical deteriorations eventually lead older adults to cease driving. It has been reported that walking is well
perceived among older adults as a travel mode as well as a physical activity that leads to a healthy life. How to
create more walkable environments that facilitate successful aging and healthy lifestyle have garnered attention
within planning and public health research and practice.
While walking is a desirable activity and a travel mode that benefits older adults, it should be noted that older
pedestrians are vulnerable road users. In 2010, 13.1 percent of the total U.S. resident population (40.4 million
people) were age 65 and older. However, they made up 19.3 percent of all pedestrian fatalities in the same year.
The pedestrian fatality rate of older adults age 65-74 per 100,000 persons was 1.98 and that of those age 75 and
older was 2.78 while the rate of all ages combined was 1.64 in 2010.
This study will examine pedestrian crash characteristics of older adults age 65 and over using the General
Estimates System (GES) data. GES data come from a nationally representative sample of police reported motor
vehicle crashes of all types and injury levels in the United States. Pedestrian crashes occurred between 2009 and
2013 from the data will be analyzed for this study. Personal (both driver and pedestrian), temporal,
environmental, spatial characteristics associated with older pedestrian crashes will be investigated with a
comparison to younger adult pedestrians age 20-59. The random coefficient binary logit model will be employed
to conduct a robust analysis to examine unique characteristics of older pedestrian crashes in comparison with
younger adult pedestrian crashes.

The findings of this study will contribute to better understanding of older pedestrian crashes and what can be
done to improve their safety. More specifically, the findings will reveal specific behavior and/or circumstances
that drivers and older pedestrians need to pay attention to avoid crashes and what roadway environments and
safety strategies need to be developed in the face of increasing number and proportion of older adults in society.
References
 National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Traffic Safety Facts: Older Population. DOT HS 811 640,
July 2012
 Steve O‫׳‬Hern, Jennifer Oxley. Understanding travel patterns to support safe active transportation for older
adults. Journal of transportation & Health, In Press, Available online 11 November 2014
 Aurélie Dommes, Viola Cavallo, Jean-Baptiste Dubuisson, Isabelle Tournier, Fabrice Vienne. Crossing a
two-way street: comparison of young and old pedestrians. Journal of Safety Research, Volume 50,
September 2014, Pages 27-34
 Nigel Walford, Edgar Samarasundera, Judith Phillips, Ann Hockey, Nigel Foreman. Older people's
navigation of urban area as pedestrians: Measuring quality of the built environment using oral
narratives and virtual routes. Landscape and urban_planning, Volume 100, Issues 1–2, 30 March 2011,
Pages 163-168
 Catherine A. Gorrie, Julie Brown, Phil M.E. Waite. Crash characteristics of older pedestrian fatalities:
Dementia pathology may be related to ‘at risk’ traffic situations. Accident Analysis & Prevention, Volume
40, Issue 3, May 2008, Pages 912-919

Abstract Index #: 755
OVERCOMING INADEQUATE FEDERAL TRANSPORTATION FUNDING: COMPARING MULTI-JURISDICTIONAL
REFERENDUMS ACROSS METRO area
Abstract System ID#: 723
Individual Paper
WEINREICH, David [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] dpwein@umich.edu
Funding decisions, and the process through which they are made, often serve as de facto planning, as decisions
are made which govern billions of dollars of infrastructure, and last decades into the future. This process can
become quite complicated when building large regional infrastructure projects that connect many jurisdictions,
and require the cooperation of numerous local governments. This challenge is exacerbated by an inadequate and
decreasing federal commitment to regional transportation (Baldwin & Lombardi 2005).
Many local governments have responded by asking citizens to vote on whether to fund their own transportation,
a method known as local option taxation or self-help funding. While these are an expedient solution, they make it
difficult to coordinate infrastructure across local jurisdictions due to uneven levels of funding from one
jurisdiction to another, and disjointed decisions across jurisdictional lines (Goldman 2007). For example, without
a regional funding source, a rail line from one city to another might easily stop at the county line. Indeed, the
literature on the role local option taxes play in regional transportation planning suggests insufficient crossjurisdictional coordination in the process for choosing projects to fund using local option tax measures (Goldman
2003). Some regions have sought to overcome this issue by moving the “local” process to the regional scale, and
holding a referendum across several local jurisdictions at once. This has allowed them to propose more
comprehensive solutions in an integrated and multi-jurisdictional infrastructure program. State authorizing
legislation plays a major part in limiting the use of multi-jurisdictional transportation funding processes (Frug
2002), and this study seeks to better understand the role state legislation has played in shaping multijurisdictional tax processes across several US metro regions.
This study builds on past work looking at the Bay Area, and compares those findings to research conducted in
several other US regions. It examines how multi-jurisdictional infrastructure funding processes have occurred in
several US regions. For each case it employs interviews and archival documents to understand the extent to
which the process was shaped by internal factors, such as its participants and local politics, versus features of the

state legislation that indicate the level of local autonomy granted by the state. This inquiry is especially
concerned with the mechanics through which projects were selected, and how this autonomy affected the
decision making process. This research will provide evidence of what made each process work, what did not, and
how such processes can be done better in the future. In a political environment shaped by increasing devolution
of power from the federal government to local and state levels of government, it is essential for academics and
policy makers to understand the methods being used to bridge localist tendencies and develop regional
infrastructure. The multi-jurisdictional referendum strategy remains understudied, but holds enormous promise
to provide comprehensive regional solutions despite a trend towards devolution of decisions to lower levels of
government.
References
 Baldwin, Daniel; Lombardi, and Peter. (2005). “Governmental Subsidies for Public Transit: History,
Current Issues, and Recent Evidence.” Public Works Management Policy 10, (138).
 Frug, G. (2002). Beyond Regional Governance. Harvard Law Review, 115 (1763).
 Goldman, T. (2003). Local Option Taxes and the New Subregionalism in Transportation Planning.
Dissertation. University of California, Berkeley.
 Goldman, T. (2007). Transportation Tax Ballot Initiatives as Regional Planning Processes. Transportation
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 1997, 9-16.
 Wachs, Martin. (2003). “Local Option Transportation Taxes: Devolution as Revolution.” Access. No. 22.
Spring

Abstract Index #: 756
IMMIGRANT TRAVEL BEHAVIOR IN THE SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA: FINDINGS FROM AN INTERCEPT SURVEY
Abstract System ID#: 732
Individual Paper
AGRAWAL, Asha [San Jose State University] asha.weinstein.agrawal@sjsu.edu
BARAJAS, Jesus [University of California, Berkeley] jmbarajas@berkeley.edu, presenting author, primary author
Although immigration has slowed during the recent economic downturn, immigrants and their descendants still
make up a growing proportion of the US population. Low-income immigrants are particularly reliant on transit,
walking, and bicycling for their daily travel, much more so than other population groups. Improving their access
to regional economic opportunities and retaining their low reliance on polluting and congesting personal vehicles
requires reducing barriers to alternative transportation such as distance, safety, inconvenience and cost.
Scholarly literature has tended to find that the built environment, transportation service provision, cost, and
resource sharing are the primary factors in transportation choice (see for example Chatman 2014; Chatman and
Klein 2011; Agrawal et al. 2011; Blumenberg and Smart 2010). “Soft” measures, such as perceptions of those
objectively measured factors as well as attitudes toward safety and convenience of different modes, have not
been explored in much detail in low-income or immigrant populations, or via last-mile walking and bicycling
connections to public transit. Our study fills this gap in scholarship.
In this paper, we present results from the second phase of our study on immigrant travel in the San Francisco Bay
Area, with a intercept survey in the field that has collected about 1,200 responses so far from major transit stops,
commercial districts, and other locations in predominantly low-income immigrant neighborhood. The survey
collects habitual travel mode, perceptions of and attitudes toward the neighborhood environment and
transportation barriers, and demographic characteristics. We will report findings from data description, statistical
tests of comparison between immigrant and non-immigrant respondents, and neighborhood-by-neighborhood
spatial variation in perceptions and attitudes among respondents of different nativities, incomes and modal
patterns.
The results form part of a larger study that includes recent work in which we conducted interviews of low-income
Latino immigrants and staff of nonprofit organizations, qualitatively describing what respondents identified as
barriers and challenges in their daily travel (Barajas, Chatman, and Agrawal 2014). Our results will help

transportation planners understand how perceptions among different population groups may influence travel in
distinct ways. They will also inform further study of immigrant travel in planning practice by identifying
information relevant to immigrants’ needs that transportation agencies do not typically collect in travel surveys
or via secondary data sources.
References
 Agrawal, Asha Weinstein, Evelyn Blumenberg, Sarah Abel, Gregory Pierce, and Charles N. Darrah. 2011.
Getting Around When You’re Just Getting by: The Travel Behavior and Transportation Expenditures of
Low-Income Adults. MTI Report 10-02. San Jose, CA: Mineta Transportation Institute.
 Barajas, Jesus M., Daniel G. Chatman, and Asha Weinstein Agrawal. 2014. “Barriers to Travel for LowIncome Latino Immigrants.” Paper presented at the ACSP 54th Annual Conference, Philadelphia, PA,
November 1.
 Blumenberg, Evelyn, and Michael Smart. 2010. “Getting by with a Little Help from My Friends...and
Family: Immigrants and Carpooling.” Transportation 37: 429–46. doi:10.1007/s11116-010-9262-4.
 Chatman, Daniel G. 2014. “Explaining the ‘Immigrant Effect’ on Auto Use: The Influences of
Neighborhoods and Preferences.” Transportation 41 (3): 441–61. doi:10.1007/s11116-013-9475-4.
 Chatman, Daniel G., and Nicholas Klein. 2011. “Immigrants and Automobility in New Jersey: The Role of
Spatial and Occupational Factors in Commuting to Work.” In Auto Motives: Understanding Car Use,
edited by Karen Lucas, Evelyn Blumenberg, and Rachel Weinberger, 253–76. Bingley, UK: Emerald Group
Publishing.

Abstract Index #: 757
REMEMBRANCE OF CARS AND BUSES PAST: HOW PRIOR LIFE EXPERIENCES INFLUENCE TRAVEL CHOICES
Abstract System ID#: 740
Individual Paper
KLEIN, Nicholas [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] nick.klein@rutgers.edu, presenting author, primary
author
SMART, Michael [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] msmart@ejb.rutgers.edu
This study uses data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) to examine how prior residential locations
and travel experiences influence later travel choices. This panel data set, the longest-lived of its kind, contains
information on families, individuals within those families, their residential locations, and a host of other variables,
including their expenditures on automobiles and public transportation. The PSID includes approximately 22,000
individuals living in 9,000 families. We examine how one’s residential location history (from 1968 to 2013)
influences the decisions to own and operate a car on the one hand, and use public transportation on the other.
We explore whether those who have previously lived in auto-oriented environments continue to use automobiles
when they move to transit-rich places, and we test whether they use cars at greater rates than their neighbors
who do not have a history of living in an auto-dominated environment. We also explore the opposite trend:
whether those who previously lived in transit-rich places “carry with them” a habit of riding transit, even when
they move to transit-poor environments. For both these phenomena, we examine the durability of these habits
over time.
We find that prior residential location and travel experiences do inform current travel choices. Descriptive
statistics suggest that families who move from transit-rich area to transit-poor area own fewer cars and use
more public transportation than their new neighbors who have not moved from a transit-rich area. We also
estimate time-series regression models of transit expenditures and car ownership to control for the possibility
that factors associated with moving (for instance, age, changes in employment status, and others) may explain
our findings. Initial findings suggest that prior travel environments continue to exert an influence on current
travel patterns, though characteristics of the current travel environment are more important.

References
 Scheiner, Joachim. (2014). “Gendered key events in the life course: Effects on changes in travel mode
choice over time.” Journal of transportation Geography, 37, 47-60.
 Schilich, R. and Axhausen, K. (2003). “Habitual travel behavior: Evidence from a six week travel diary.”
Transportation, 30(1), 13–36.
 Weinberger, Rachel and Frank Goetzke. (2010). “Unpacking preference: How previous experience affects
auto ownership in the United States.” Urban Studies, 47(10), 2111-2128.

Abstract Index #: 758
TRANSIT-ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT FOR AGING ADULTS: AN EVALUATION OF RECENT TRENDS
Abstract System ID#: 743
Individual Paper
DUNCAN, Michael [Florida State University] mdduncan@fsu.edu, presenting author, primary author
WOOD, Brittany [Florida State University] bsw05@fsu.edu
HORNER, Mark [Florida State University] mhorner@fsu.edu
VALDEZ-TORRES, Yazmin [Florida State University] yjv11@my.fsu.edu
Fulfilling daily needs associated with successful aging portends many challenges. In particular, as their driving
skills deteriorate, many aging adults will need to find alternative means of travel that will allow them to conduct
basic out-of-home activities. One approach to addressing this problem is to create places that allow one to
effectively reach a variety of activities without a car. A transit-oriented development (TOD) ostensibly provides
this type of place. TOD is commonly defined as compact, walkable development immediately surrounding a
major transit station.
In this project our key objective is to provide a nationwide examination of TOD from the perspective of how well
it attracts aging adults. This will involve collecting data about the demographic characteristics (particularly age
profiles) of the area surrounding a large selection of major transit stations across the US. The geographic
locations of more than 4,000 transit stations are available from the Center for Transit Oriented Development
(2014), which will form the set of stations we will analyze. This task will involve GIS overlays of census data from
2010 and 2000. This task will also involve the classification of station area to determine which ones meet basic
criteria for TOD in terms compactness and walkability. Ultimately, the change in older populations (both in raw
numbers and percentages) around these transit stations will be compared to surrounding area to determine
how much (if at all) TODs have been attracting older groups. Further, specific stations that have performed
particular well and poorly will be identified and studied in more detail to identify specific elements of TODs that
seem to attract or repel older adults.
References
 Rosenbloom, S. (2009). Meeting transportation needs in an aging-friendly community. Generations,
33(2), 33–43.
 Cervero, R., Murphy, S., Ferrell, C., Goguts, N., Tsai, Y. H., Arrington, G. B, Peninger, P. (2004). TransitOriented Development in the United States: Experiences, Challenges, and Prospects (No. 102).
 Alsnih, R., & Hensher, D. A. (2003). The mobility and accessibility expectations of seniors in an aging
population. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 37(10), 903–916.
 Center for Transit Oriented Development. (n.d.). TOD Database. 2014. Retrieved from
http://toddata.cnt.org/

Abstract Index #: 759
EXAMING THE CORRELATION BETWEEN EXISTING TRAVEL BEHAVIOR AND WILLINGNESS TO ADOPT
AUTOMATED VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY
Abstract System ID#: 755
Individual Paper

DUNCAN, Michael [Florida State University] mdduncan@fsu.edu, presenting author, primary author
CHAPIN, Tim [Florida State University] tchapin@fsu.edu
CRUTE, Jeremy [Florida State University] jpc12c@my.fsu.edu
Automated Vehicles (AV) will likely have far-reaching implications for the design and use of the transportation
system. Studies examining the potential  impact of AV have identified numerous factors that could impact travel
behavior, roadway capacity, and traffic congestion including reduced travel costs, improved in roadway capacity
and efficiency, reduced vehicle crashes, and improved mobility for non-drivers (Eno, 2013; Bierstedt et al., 2014;
Anderson, et al., 2014). However, the potentially offsetting effects of these factors have created uncertainty as to
the ultimate impact of AV on travel behavior (Litman, 2015; Anderson, et al., 2014). Consequently, to be able to
effectively plan for the emergence of AV, it is necessary to develop a better understanding of how AV will impact
individuals’ travel decisions and behavior. Of particular interest to advocates of alternative forms of
transportation is the impact AV will have on individuals’ mode choice. Will AV cement the place of the
automobile as the dominant form of transportation by drawing people away from other modes and enabling
those previously unable to drive to travel by automobile or will the emergence of automated taxi-services and
shared auto-ownership heighten the ability of public transit to serve larger portions of the population? While
predicting future mode-shares may be uncertain at best, insight into the impact AV will have on mode-choice
decisions can gained by examining the characteristics of those more likely to adopt AV.
To this end, this study will analyze survey data examining the public’s perceptions of and willingness to adopt AV
to determine how individuals’ current travel behavior  impact their willingness to adopt and use AV. More
specifically, it will address how one’s current mode choice, quantity of travel, and ability to drive (as measured by
possession of a drivers license and car ownership) affects an individual’s eagerness to adopt AV. By examining
each of these questions, this study hopes to provide insight into the impact the emergence of AV will likely have
on the public’s future travel behavior and mode-share.
This research will use data from a survey currently being conducted by a team of researchers at Florida State
University. This survey specifically asks respondents how likely they are to adopt AV technology (very likely,
somewhat likely, somewhat unlikely, very unlikely). The responses to this question will be used as the dependent
variable in an ordinal model. Current travel behavior characteristics (as described above) will be used as the
primary explanatory variables, along with a set of demographic controls.
References
 Anderson, J.M., Kalra, N., Stanley, K.D., Sorensen, P., Samaras, C., Oluwatola, O.A. (2014). Autonomous
vehicle technology: A guide for policymakers. RAND Corporation.
 Bierstedt, J., Gooze, A., Gray, C., Perterman, J., Raykin, L., & Walters, J. (2014). Effects of next-generation
vehicles on travel demand and highway capacity. Fehr Peers (FP) Think.
 Eno Center for Transportation (2013). Preparing a nation for autonomous vehicles: Opportunities,
barriers and policy recommendations. Eno Center for Transportation.
 Litman, T. (2015). Autonomous vehicle implementation predictions: Implications for transportation planning.
Victoria transportation Policy Institute.

Abstract Index #: 760
DISCONNECTED: TRANSPORTATION AND MOBILITY BARRIERS THROUGH THE VOICES OF LOW-INCOME
RESIDENTS
Abstract System ID#: 756
Individual Paper
SANTO, Charles [University of Memphis] casanto@memphis.edu
In a sprawling city like Memphis, low-income neighborhood are anywhere and everywhere – they are not
necessarily proximate to downtown like they are in older monocentric city. Residents in these comminuty are

disconnected from entry-level jobs both by distance and by inadequate transportation system. Limited
municipal investment in transportation options exacerbates household underemployment and degrades quality
of life, while continuing poverty erodes the ability of local government to make adequate investment in
transportation options.
Research from the Brookings Institution and others suggests that “improved transportation services can enhance
economic outcomes, with the most compelling evidence centered on access to automobiles…” (Blumenberg &
Waller, 2003). Current census data show that even among households that do not own a vehicle, 20 percent drive
alone to work—meaning they find a private car to borrow—and another 12 percent commute via carpool (Tomer
& Kane, 2014). The most robust research on mobility and poverty was conducted by the Urban Institute for
Driving to Opportunity (2014). Findings indicate important differences between housing voucher recipients who
had access to automobiles and those who were transit dependent.
This research will be based on storytelling and narrative from residents of a low income neighborhood in
Memphis. Particpants will share their daily travel routines through survey responses, face-to-face interviews, and
daily journals. This will help us identify transportation challenges and reveal what alternative informal “organic”
approaches to getting around are in use. Documentary-style videos will communicate residents’ stories.
Specific questions might include the following.
•
•
•
•

Do residents take the bus to work? What happens when they do? Does it get them there efficiently? Do
they feel secure?
What about residents who own a car? Are reliability issues and maintenance expenses an issue? What
about the cost of gas and insurance?
Can residents bike or walk to where they need to be?
What are the informal alternatives? A neighbor with a car? A car shared by multiple family members?
Etc. What policy solutions can be implemented to support these approaches?

The participation of residents will serve the following research questions:
1.

2.
3.

Are there innovative alternatives to the current approach to transportation that would be more
effective/efficient at improving mobility in low income neighborhood? (And is Memphis "too far gone”
for an approach that focuses solely on the bus as transit for the poor?)
What can we learn from residents about the informal, “organic” approaches to getting around that they
already use?
What is the role of narrative in community development and can narrative (storytelling) effect
policymaking in ways that data alone cannot?

The interdisciplinary collaboration between planning and film students, will allow for community residents to
share their concerns and give them voice through powerful storytelling mechanisms – in a way that makes them
more that mere data points. Participating households would share their daily travel routines through survey
responses, face-to-face interviews, and daily journals. This would help us identify transportation challenges and
reveal what alternative informal “organic” approaches to getting around are in use. Short documentary films
would depict “a day in the life” of residents facing a variety of challenges that affect their quality of life.
There is ample data that describes the inadequacies of the local transit system and the connection between
transit and poverty. (In Memphis, workers who rely on public transit earn half as much as those who drive to
work.) But perhaps numbers are not enough. There is a vast literature on the role of storytelling in city planning.
This research will serve as a case study to help understand how storytelling can influence policy.
In addition, a data based approach to policy tends to lead to a one-size fits all set of solutions and misses
important nuances.

References
 Pendall, R., Hayes, C., George, A., McDade, Z., Dawkins, C., Jeon, J., et al. (2014). Driving to opportunity:
Understanding the links among transportation access, residential outcomes, and economic opportunity
for housing voucher recipients. Urban Institute.
 Tomer, A., & Kane, J. (2014). Car remains kings and barrier to economic opportunity. Brookings
Institution.
 Blumenberg, E., & Waller, M. (2003). The long journey to work: A federal transportation policy for
working families. Brookings Institution.
 Sandercock, L. (2003). Out of the closet: The importance of stories and storytelling in planning practice.
Planning Theory & Practice, 4 (1), 11-28.
 Throgmorton, J. (1996). Planning as Persuasive Storytelling. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Abstract Index #: 761
THE COST AND AFFORDABILITY PARADOX OF TRANSIT-ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT
Abstract System ID#: 758
Individual Paper
RENNE, John [University of New Orleans] jrenne@uno.edu, presenting author, primary author
TOLFORD, Tara [University of New Orleans] tmtolfor@uno.edu
HAMIDI, Shima [University of Utah] shima.hamidi@gmail.com
EWING, Reid [University of Utah] ewing@arch.utah.edu
Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) has recently become a target amongst some housing affordability activists
in response to the high cost of housing. However, much of this activism has been visceral, based on the sticker
shock of rental and for-sale prices of new construction in a market with pent-up demand for living in TODs. This
study uncovers a paradox that while TODs are significantly more expensive places to buy and rent compared to
the average home, nationally, housing affordability in TODs is more attainable than non-TOD station locations.
Moreover, when accounting for the combined cost of housing and transportation, TODs are more affordable than
non-TOD station area. The study establishes a typology of station area along a TOD – Transit-Adjacent
Development (TAD) spectrum. Data from the US Census, the National TOD Database, the EPA Smart Location
Database, Walk Score and Zillow Real Estate Research are combined into a national, geocoded database of 4,400
station area. Walk Score and housing density are used to establish a typology of station area into categories of
TODs, TADs and Hybrids. The study also compares the built environment, vehicle ownership, commute mode,
transit service frequency, housing tenure, socioeconomic composition and access to jobs in TODs, TADs and
Hybrid station area.
References
 Ewing, R., & Cervero, R. (2010). Travel and the Built Environment:A Meta-Analysis. Journal of the
American Planning Association, 76(3), 265-296.
 Belsky, E. S., Goodman, J., & Drew, R. (2005, June). Measuring the nation’s rental housing affordability
problems. The Joint Center for Housing Studies, Harvard University.
http://www.jchs.harvard.edu/publications/rental/rd051_measuring_rental_affordability05.pdf
 Cao, X., Mokhtarian, P. L., & Handy, S. L. (2009). Examining the  impact of residential self-selection on
travel behaviour: A focus on empirical findings. transportation Reviews, 29(3), 359-395.
 Center for Transit-Oriented Development and Center for Neighborhood Technology, (2006) The
Affordability Index: A New Tool for Measuring the True Affordability of a Housing Choice. Brookings
Institution, Washington, D.C.
 O’Dell, W., Smith, M. T., & White, D. (2004). Weaknesses in current measures of housing needs. Housing
and Society, 31(1), 29-40.

Abstract Index #: 762
DOES ZONING MATTER? THE  impact OF LIGHT RAIL TRANSIT ON PROPERTY VALUES: COMPARING HOUSTON
AND DALLAS
Abstract System ID#: 761
Individual Paper
PAN, Qisheng [Texas Southern University] pan_qs@tsu.edu
There is a plausible and intuitive assumption that a “zoning city” and a “non-zoning city” develop noticeable
differences in terms of urban form, transportation system performance, and the  impact of transportation
infrastructures on housing markets. However, there were few studies that involve rigorous tests of these
assumptions using sound empirical evidence. This study addresses these gaps by comparing Houston and Dallas,
the former the largest U.S. non-zoning city, and the latter, a zoning city of comparable size and regional situation.
This study compares data on the transportation performance of these two city, including mode shares, travel
time, and travel distance, etc. It also uses recent housing appraisal data to examine the effects of Houston’s
METRORail line and Dallas’s DART rail line on residential property values. It adopts a conventional ordinary linear
regression (OLS) test to investigate the contribution of a set of variables representing the physical, neighborhood,
and accessibility characteristics of properties. The results for the  impact of rail transit system on both
residential and commercial property values in Houston and Dallas are compared.
References
 Cervero, R. and J. Landis (1997) “Twenty years of the Bay Area Rapid Transit System:  land_use and
development  impact,” Transportation Research A 31(4), 309-333.
 Giuliano, Genevieve (2004). “ land_use  impact of transportation investments: highway and transit,” In
The Geography of Urban Transportation, eds. Hanson, S. and Giuliano, G., 237-273. New York: the
Guilford Press.
 Hess, D. B. and T. M. Almeida (2007) “Impact of Proximity to Light Rail Rapid Transit on Station-area
Property Values in Buffalo, New York,” Urban Studies, Vol 44, No. 5/6, pp. 1041-1068.
 Knaap, G. J., C. Ding, and L. D. Hopkins (2001) “Do plans matter? The effects of light rail plans on land
values in station area,” Journal of Planning Education and Research, 21(1), pp. 32-39.
 Nelson, A. C. (1992) “Effects of elevated heavy-rail transit stations on house prices with respect to
neighborhood income,” Transportation Research Record 1359, Planning and Administration: Economics,
Finance, and Administration, Transportation Research Board, National Research Council, National
Academy Press, Washington, DC.

Abstract Index #: 763
MY BRAIN AT THE BUS STOP: AN EXPLORATORY FRAMEWORK FOR APPLYING EEG-BASED EMOTION
DETECTION TECHNIQUES IN TRANSPORTATION STUDY
Abstract System ID#: 770
Individual Paper
LI, Zelin [MIT] zelinli@mit.edu, presenting author, primary author
ZHAO, Jinhua [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] jinhua@mit.edu
DUARTE, Fabio [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] duarte.fabio@pucpr.br
ZHAO, Zhan [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] zhanzhaowf@hotmail.com
Researchers in transportation and city planning are interested in how people perceive and react to the city
services and environment. Emotion is a natural response after the perception, and may lead to behavioral
feedback. Hence, there are important implications in emotions for designers, planners and policy makers.
Currently emotions in urban studies are usually assessed by researcher’s inference from observations, or
subjects’ self-reports. There are multiple loopholes in these methods: they are often inaccurate, hard to quantify,
or measured with a time lag. This paper discusses a new method enabled by the advances in
electroencephalographic algorithms and hardware. We use Emotiv EPOC headset, a multi-channel portable

system to evaluate emotions. The headset provides real time, quantitative data for 5 kinds of emotions in high
time resolution.
There have been a few studies applying the technique in the city environment perception and transportation
field. This paper highlights a missing feature in the literature: a discussion of the experiment design process. We
describe the features of the EEG based emotion detection technique, and then present a framework for general
experiment design. We list 7 components that should be considered during experiment design and discuss
alternatives for each of them. The components are environment setting, emotion calibration method, emotion
elicitation method, variable setting, recording method, sampling method, and data processing method.
Based on such framework, we carried out a pilot experiment measuring the emotion change in the bus waiting
experience. The experiment illustrates one specification of the experiment design possibilities. The bus waiting
experience is simulated through watching video clips, which are shot at a bus stop. There is a warm-up period
that allows the headset to do emotions calibration as well as allows the subject to get used to wearing the
headset. To help the subjects elicit the emotions that usually come up when waiting for a bus, we designed a
reward-penalty scheme according to the length of waiting time. The variables that the pilot experiment
investigates are length of waiting time and bus schedule information. The recording method, sampling method
and data processing method are detailed in the paper.
By analyzing the data from the experiment, we interpret the emotion changes according to events and the
subject’s personality. The results show that emotion changes often occur as certain events approach. The event
may be a reward-penalty time threshold, or seeing a bus coming in the video. The emotion data generated by the
headset agree with the subject’s self-reported personality pretty well. The emotion curves are less fluctuant for
more patient and calm people.
Though the EEG based emotion detection technique is still at the emerging stage, this study along with other
researches suggest that the current technique is mature enough and has promising potential of bringing new
insights of emotion study into the city and transportation planning field. The pilot experiment focuses on the
emotion change during waiting for a bus, but the research possibility brought by the technique is much broader
than this topic. The emotion feedback is basically a response, and the question could lie in city form design,
public transportation service, urban policy and so forth.
References
 Aspinall P., Mavros P., and Coyne R., Roe, J. The urban brain: analysing outdoor physical activity with
mobile EEG. British Journal of Sports Medicine. 2013.
 Chang, C.-Y., Chen, P.-K. Human response to window views and indoor plants in the workplace.
HortScience Vol. 40, 2005 pp. 1354-1359.
 Kar S, Bhagat M, Routray A. EEG signal analysis for the assessment and quantification of driver’s fatigue.
Transportation research part F: traffic psychology and behaviour, Vol. 13, 2010, pp. 297-306.
 Pastor G, Tejero P, Choliz M, and Roca J. Rear-view mirror use, driver alertness and road type: an
empirical study using EEG measures. Transportation research part F: traffic psychology and behaviour,
Vol. 9, 2006, pp. 286-297.
 Roe, J., Aspinall, P., Mavros, P., and Coyne, R. Engaging the brain: the impact of natural versus urban
scenes using novel EEG methods in an experimental setting. environment Sciences Vol.1, 2013 pp. 93104.

Abstract Index #: 764
ASSESSMENT OF FLORIDA RESIDENTS ATTITUDES TOWARD AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES
Abstract System ID#: 776
Individual Paper
CHAPIN, Tim [Florida State University] tchapin@fsu.edu, presenting author, primary author
CRUTE, Jeremy [Florida State University] jpc12c@my.fsu.edu

Autonomous Vehicles (AV) are a quickly emerging technology that could radically alter the nature of
transportation in ways no technology has done since the invention of the car. Even though AV promises to
significantly improve the safety and efficiency of the transportation system, the technology’s dependence on
passengers’ willingness to trust a computer to safely navigate any driving situation will make the public’s
attitudes toward AV one of the most important issues in the future use and success of AV. In particular, the
question of whether consumers will be willing to relinquish full control of the vehicle will be a major determining
factor of whether and how quickly AV are adopted. In addition, public opinions concerning issues surrounding
AV’s incorporation into the transportation system, including whether AV should have dedicated lanes and
whether AV should be a private or public form of transportation, can help to inform policymakers on how to best
guide and regulate the smooth integration of AV technology. However, AV are being developed so quickly that
very little is known about the public’s attitudes toward and willingness to adopt AV. In this way, developing a
better understanding of the public’s attitudes toward and willingness to adopt AV is vital to the smooth and
successful incorporation of AV into the transportation system.
Existing literature on public opinion of AV suggests that the majority of Americans are interested in AV, but are
not yet ready to fully embrace the technology (JD Power and Associates, 2014; Schoettle & Sivak, 2014; KPMG,
2013; Howard & Dai, 2013). This study expands on this literature by further examining the causes of the public’s
distrust of AV, determining how the public’s perception is moderated by demographic characteristics and
comfort with technology, and uncovering how likely the public will be to adopt AV in the future.
To this end, a team of researchers at FSU have conducted a survey of Florida residents to gauge their knowledge
of, interest in, and willingness to adopt both fully and semi-autonomous vehicles. The survey assesses whether
residents trust autonomous vehicles enough to adopt them and identifies issues policymakers may need to
address before AV can be adopted on a large scale. To do this, the survey investigates the public’s perception of
the benefits (e.g. improved safety and efficiency) and risks (e.g. privacy and liability) related to the use of AV.
Respondents are also asked their preferences assuming different stages and forms of AV including privately
owned autonomous vehicles, shared-ownership vehicles, taxi-like AV services, and transit system that rely on AV
technology, as well as questions on willingness to pay for autonomous technology. Finally, the survey assesses
how participants’ demographic characteristics, travel behavior, and comfort with technology impact attitudes
toward AV. Given AV’s unique potential to enhance the mobility of aging and transportation disadvantaged
populations, and the State of Florida's large elderly population which will grow to over 5 million in the next
decade, the survey gives special attention to the attitudes and concerns of Florida’s older residents (aged 65 and
up).
References
 Howard, D., & Dai, D. (2013). Public Perceptions of Self-driving Cars: The Case of Berkeley, California.
93rd Annual Meeting of the Transportation Research Board.
 JD Power and Associates. (2014). 2014 U.S. Automotive Emerging Technologies Study Results [Press
release]. Retrieved from http://autos.jdpower.com/content/study-auto/lN3SbRs/2014-u-s-automotiveemerging-technologies-study-results.htm
 KPMG. (2013). Self-driving Cars: Are We Ready?. KPMG.
 Schoettle, B., & Sivak, M. (2014). A survey of public opinion about autonomous and self-driving vehicles
in the U.S., the UK., and Australia. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Transportation Research
Institute.

Abstract Index #: 765
ASSESSING PARATRANSIT SERVICES IN HARRIS COUNTY, TEXAS
Abstract System ID#: 782
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session
RAJBHANDARI, subrity [Texas Southern University] subrity_rajbhandari@yahoo.com
SEN, Lalita [Texas Southern University] Sen_LX@tsu.edu

MetroLift is a complementary paratransit service offered by the Metropolitan Transit Authority in Harris County
and surrounding area. Many studies have shown that the senior and disabled population is expected to increase
in Harris County, which will increase the demand for ParaTransit Service. However, Metrolift is facing a funding
challenge, which means it has to use its resources wisely. This analysis is designed to help Metrolift optimize its
services by better understanding its customers and their trip behaviors within the Harris County using simple GIS
tools. The analysis is mainly divided into three parts. The first part deals with exploring where the Metrolift users
reside and trying to understand the association of socioeconomic characteristic with the demand of the services
using Patron Data from December 2013. The second part of the analysis helps to understand the temporal trip
patterns like when, why and how many trips are being made, using Trip Data from October 2013. Finally the third
part is designed to visualize the location and concentration of these trips. The results from these analyses show
that the number of Disable Persons in a block group, Household Income, Race, and Vehicle Availability are
significant variables in determining the demand for MetroLift. Additionally, the maximum numbers of trips are for
residential purpose followed by shopping and work related trips. Metrolift can use the analysis as a way to
classify essential and discretionary trips, in the event there comes a time, when there is a need to “ration” trips
using Metrolift , due to expanding demand by a greater number of eligible riders in the Houston Metro area. Thus
these analyses provided some valuable insights in understanding trip patterns and behaviors of Metrolift users in
Harris County which can in turn be crucial in managing and improving the Metrolift services.

Abstract Index #: 766
HOW DO SOCIO-DEMOGRAPHICS AND BUILT ENVIRONMENT AFFECT INDIVIDUAL ACCESSIBILITY BASED ON
ACTIVITY SPACE? EVIDENCE FROM GREATER CLEVELAND, OHIO
Abstract System ID#: 790
Individual Paper
CHEN, Na [The Ohio State University] chen.2572@buckeyemail.osu.edu, presenting author, primary author
AKAR, Gulsah [Ohio State University] akar.3@osu.edu
Transportation planners traditionally use mobility to evaluate transportation policy and projects. However,
mobility-based planning generally favors private vehicles over public transit and non-motorized modes (Handy
2002). Making driving around easier is the major goal of mobility-based planning. It tends to encourage more
people to drive while ignoring the needs of non-drivers. As a result of this trend, congestion, air pollution and
social equity deteriorate in the urban environment (Handy 2005). This trend is conflicted with some sustainability
goals such as enhancing environment viability and social equity. In recent years, transportation plans and
studies have shown a growing interest in accessibility-based planning that focuses on the needs of travelers
instead of the transportation system (Handy 2005; Lucas 2012). Accessibility is defined as the ease of an individual or
groups of people to participate in activities through using one or multiple modes under certain constraints (Geurs
and van Wee 2004). Currently, accessibility studies commonly rely on using a uniform travel time or distance as
impedance for each zone. However, this uniform impedance cannot capture the heterogeneity in individual travel
behavior within each zone. As compared to travel time or distance, activity space is a relatively comprehensive
impedance. It considers the traveler’s characteristics, the spatial distribution of the locations this traveler has
been to, and the routes and area travelled through (Schönfelder and Axhausen 2003). In this study, individual
accessibility is measured and analyzed to reflect the capability of reaching resources available within individual
activity space. This approach is adopted to describe how the levels of accessibility vary across different income
groups. If the difference exists, we also explore how potential factors influence accessibility at the individual
level.
Using the 2012 Northeast Ohio Regional Travel Survey, individual daily activity space is calculated through a
Traffic Analysis Zone (TAZ) area based approach. The identified activity space is then used to calculate individual
accessibility to different opportunities (land-use types at the parcel level). Based on statistical comparisons, we
find that low-income people have lower accessibility to most urban opportunities (except commercial and
industrial parcels) as compared to other income groups. To identify the potential factors leading to these
differences, Negative Binomial Regression models are used. These models examine the effects of socio-

demographics, transit proximity and built environment on individual accessibility. To reduce the ambiguous
effects on travel behavior from individual land-use variables, the K-means cluster approach is applied to
characterize the built environment into 7 new neighborhood types. The preliminary results indicate that living in
more urbanized neighborhood increases individual accessibility, after controlling for socio-demographical
features and transit proximity.
This study adds to existing accessibility literature through using activity space to identify and explore accessibility
at the individual level. This approach accounts for both individuals’ socio-economic characteristics and living
environment. Therefore, it provides better understanding of social effects of transportation policy at
disaggregated level, as opposed to the traditional zonal accessibility.
References
 Geurs, K. T., and B. van Wee. 2004. Accessibility evaluation of land-use and transportation strategies: review
and research directions. Journal of transportation Geography 12 (2):127-140.
 Handy, S. 2002. Accessibility- Vs. Mobility-enhancing Strategies for Addressing Automobile Dependence
in the U.S: Institute of Transportation Studies, University of California at Davis.
 Handy, S. 2005. Planning for Accessibility: In Theory and In Practice. In Access to Destinations, edited by
D. L. K. Krizek. Oxford: Elsevier.
 Lucas, K. 2012. transportation and social exclusion: Where are we now? transportation policy 20:105-113.
 Schönfelder, S., and K. W. Axhausen. 2003. Activity spaces: measures of social exclusion? Transport
Policy 10 (4):273-286.

Abstract Index #: 767
PEAK CAR? ANALYZING CHANGES IN CAR OWNERSHIP WITH PANEL DATA FROM 1999-2013
Abstract System ID#: 795
Individual Paper
SMART, Michael [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] msmart@ejb.rutgers.edu, presenting author,
primary author
KLEIN, Nicholas [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] nick.klein@rutgers.edu
Since the mid-2000s, car use and ownership has been declining in the US and peer countries. But who exactly is
giving up their cars and why? One explanation posits that changing preferences for urban living and transit use
along with an increasing environment consciousness, could be leading to a decline in auto ownership,
particularly among the young. An alternative explanation suggests that economic factors are the cause of
declining automobile consumption. For planners, the different explanations point to different policy to balance
welfare and environment sustainability.
We the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) to examine changes in auto ownership within US families over
time. As a panel data set, the PSID is particularly well suited to analyze changes over time. We include eight
waves of the panel survey, from 1999 through 2013. This large national survey includes approximately 22,000
individuals living in 9,000 families.
First, we describe the changing nature of car ownership among various demographic groups, focusing on young
adults, older adults, racial and ethnic minorities, urbanites, low-income families, and others. We examine these
groups in conjunction with other defining characteristics of the family, including the presence of children,
residential mobility, and others. We then use a time-series regression to model changes in the ratio of cars to
adults within families across successive waves of the PSID. We examine the influence of factors such as age,
household size and structure, employment status, income, the availability of high-quality public transportation,
changing gasoline prices, and others.
We find that today’s young adults own fewer cars than previous generations did when they were young. But
focusing on young adults only tells part of the story; declining car ownership among young adults is offset by

older adults who own more cars than those who came before them. We also find that economic and
demographic factors explain much of the declining levels of auto ownership, particularly among young adults.
This suggests that planners should temper their enthusiasm about “peak car,” as this may largely be a
manifestation of economic factors that may reverse in coming years. Other factors, such as delayed marriage,
may continue into the future.
References
 Kuhnimhof, Tobias, Dirk Zumkeller, and Bastian Chlond. 2013. “Who Made Peak Car, and How? A
Breakdown of Trends over Four Decades in Four Countries.” transportation Reviews 33 (3): 325–42.
 Metz, David. 2013. “Peak Car and Beyond: The Fourth Era of Travel.” transportation Reviews 33 (3): 255–70.
 Millard-Ball, Adam, and Lee Schipper. 2011. “Are We Reaching Peak Travel? Trends in Passenger
Transport in Eight Industrialized Countries.” transportation Reviews 31 (3): 357–78.

Abstract Index #: 768
PUBLIC TRANSIT, AGGLOMERATION ECONOMIES, AND FIRM BIRTHS: EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE FROM NEW JERSEY
Abstract System ID#: 798
Individual Paper
CHEN, Xueying [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] mirabel244@gmail.com
New establishments play an important role in urban  land_use structure and regional economic development
(Shukla and Waddell, 1991; Acs, 2006). Therefore, it is critical to understand what factors determine where new
firms will form. Yet, little is known about determinants of firm formation, especially at the micro level. One major
objective of developing transportation infrastructure is to stimulate economic development; concentrating businesses
and jobs within the station area may be one strategy. If improvements in transportation infrastructure can influence
firm formation, it is possible that transportation policy can become a useful tool to promote economic growth.
However, the relationship between public transit system and new firm patterns remains largely unclear. What
are the determinants of firm formation? Do new transit services affect firm birth and how does this differ across
sectors? What implications does firm formation have for contemporary urban  land_use structure and urban
form? How do local contexts (eg: local development plans) contribute to the process of firm birth? With the
assumption that transportation infrastructure is a key determinant of new firm birth, this paper investigates the
impacts of changes in the accessibility of a new light rail line on the location patterns of new firms in Hudson
County, New Jersey.
Negative binomial models are estimated to evaluate the associations of new firms in different sectors with
proximity to transit stations. Data is derived using the geographic information system (GIS) and the National
Establishment Time-Series database. This gives detailed spatial and firm-level factors that are integrated to
construct econometric models. By mapping predicted probabilities for each industry and comparing these with
observed densities, this study also identifies the extent to which locational preference translates into aggregate
 land_use, revealing how transportation infrastructure influences firm location choices, urban  land_use patterns
and structure. How local policy might impact firm formation is also included in the estimates to provide more
specific, contextual understanding of determinants of firm formation.
References
 Shukla Vibhooti, Paul Waddell. (1991). Firm location and  land_use in discrete urban space: a study of the
spatial structure of Dallas-Fort Worth. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 21(2), 225-253.
 Acs, Z. (2006). New Firm Formation and the Region: Empirical Results from the United States. In E.
Santarelli, Entrepreneurship, Growth, and Innovation: The Dynamics of Firms and Industries (Vol. 12, pp.
105-133). New York: Springer US.

Abstract Index #: 769
TOWARD LIVABLE TRANSIT CORRIDORS: METHODS, METRICS & STRATEGIES
Abstract System ID#: 805
Individual Paper
FERRELL, Christopher [CFA Consultants] cferrell@cfaconsultants.com, presenting author, primary author
APPLEYARD, Bruce [San Diego State University] bappleyard@mail.sdsu.edu
“Livability” has become a popular term among planners in the United States. Interest in the concept emerged in
the 1970s and it was formalized on June 16, 2009 when the Secretaries of HUD, USDOT and EPA introduced the
six livability principles of the Sustainable comminuty Partnership. Yet in spite of frequent discussions in
planning and design circles lauding its importance, there has never been clear consensus on what livability
actually means, let alone how to measure it and how to achieve it.
Drawing on insights from a federally funded livability research project focusing on transit corridors (and the
constituent stations), TCRP H-45: Measures, Methods and Strategies for Transit Corridor Livability, this paper
presents and discusses the methods, metrics and data sources that were used to empirically verify a transit
corridor livability typology using data from over 300 existing transit corridors from around the U.S. Then, through
an iterative mixed method approach, combining both quantitative statistical analyses with qualitative case
studies and interviews with professionals, this paper evaluates which of these methods, metrics and data might
serve as recommended tools and practices to optimize transit corridor livability. In doing so, the paper: a)
identifies the people and place characteristics (factors) of each of the Livability Principles of the HUD/EPA/USDOT
Sustainable comminuty Partnership based on the concepts found in the livability literature; b) develops a
typology of transit corridors to help identifying and classify common physical and functional characteristics of a
place that are compatible livability-supporting planning and policy outcomes; and finally c) this paper identifies
the planning and investment strategies that are best suited to improving livability in different corridor contexts,
and which are being drafted as part of a project Handbook on strategies useful toward creating more livable
transit corridors.
This paper also presents a typology of corridor types, which is useful in helping analysts and decision makers
identify and measure how people and place characteristics interact to improve access to livability opportunities
along transit corridor. The following broad corridor types are discussed in this paper:
•

•

•

Emerging Corridors, which serve low-intensity, use-segregated comminuty with limited transit service.
Lower livability performance results from infrequent transit service, relatively few transit- and
pedestrian-accessible destinations, and auto-orientation in transportation and  land_use patterns.
Transitioning Corridors, which possess many livability components but lack the key components needed
for a high state of livability. They include Emerging Corridors that have been transformed by
development of new major transit-accessible destinations (activity centers) in at least one location along
the corridor. Transitioning Corridors also include urban revitalization and redevelopment opportunities,
either due to much underutilized land from urban decline and disinvestment, or older, economically
depressed transit-oriented neighborhood.
High-Functioning Corridors, which represent the highest levels of corridor performance. They contain
high-capacity and local transit service, provide dense and diverse destinations, offer reasonably direct
pedestrian routes along enhanced walking environments, and feature balanced jobs and housing.

These categories provide a framework that can help Handbook users to identify the Strategic Goals and planning
strategies best suited for the existing conditions and desired outcomes for their corridors.
References
 Appleyard, B., Ferrell, C. E., Carroll, M. A., & Taecker, M. (2014). Toward Livability Ethics: A Framework to
Guide Planning, Design and Engineering Decisions. Transportation Research Record.







Cervero, R., Murphy, S., C. Ferrell, N. G., & Tsai., Y. (2004). TCRP Report 102-Transit Oriented
Development in the United States: Experiences, Challenges, and Prospects. , . Washington, D.C.: Transit
Cooperative Research Program.
Ferrell, C. E., Carroll, M., Appleyard, B., Reinke, D., Ashiabor, S., Dowling, R. Cervero, R. (2011).
Reinventing the Urban Interstate: A New Paradigm for Multimodal Corridors. TCRP Report, (145).
Retrieved from http://trid.trb.org/view.aspx?id=1117035
Moore, T., Thorsnes, P., & Appleyard, B. (2007). The Transportation/ land_use Connection (New).
American Planning Association (Planners Press).

Abstract Index #: 770
WOULD CONGESTION PRICING HARM THE POOR? DO FREE ROADS HELP THE POOR?
Abstract System ID#: 809
Individual Paper
MANVILLE, Michael [Cornell University] mkm253@cornell.edu, presenting author, primary author
GOLDMAN, Emily [Cornell University] eag53@cornell.edu
Regressive congestion charges could make urban highways more efficient, but observers often worry that such
charges would disproportionately burden low-income drivers. We use data from the American Community
Survey, the Integrated Public Use Microdata Sample, and the National Household Travel Survey to investigate the
potential equity  impact of congestion charging. We show that in the USA's ten most congested urbanized area,
poor drivers are both small minority of peak hour travel and a minority of the poor. We also show free urban
highways are overwhelmingly a subsidy to the affluent. Lastly, we show that residential area near freeways,
which bear the brunt of vehicular air pollution arising from congestion, are disproportionately poor and minority,
and often populated by households without vehicles. We conclude that pricing urban freeways may visit smaller
costs on the poor than previously imagined, and may deliver substantial health benefits as well.
References
 Currie, Janet and Reed Walker. 2011. Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from E-Z Pass.
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 3(January):65-90.
 Levinson, David, 2010. Equity Effects of Road Pricing. transportation Reviews. 30(1):33-57.
 Schweitzer, Lisa and Brian Taylor. 2008. Just Pricing: The Distributional Effects of Congestion Pricing and
Sales Taxes. Transportation. 35 (6): 797-812.
 Ecola, Liisa and Thomas Light. 2009. Equity and Congestion Pricing. RAND Corporation. Santa Monica,
CA.

Abstract Index #: 771
INTEGRATED PLANNING OR DIVIDE AND CONQUER?: ASSESSING THE VIEWS OF transportation AND ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT PLANNERS IMPLEMENTING MODERN STREETCAR PROJECTS IN U.S. city
Abstract System ID#: 836
Individual Paper
FISCHER, Lauren [Columbia University] laf2153@columbia.edu
Modern streetcars are an emerging popular public investment in US city. Over the past 15 years, six system
have opened, with four more scheduled to start service in 2015 and 12 projects currently in the planning stages.
Streetcar projects are politically controversial, partially due to their claims about the ability of streetcars to spur
economic development in urban area and partially due to concerns about their higher costs compared to other
transport modes, like Bus Rapid Transit. transportation scholarship tends to deride streetcars as bad transportation
services while urban development literature (which addresses this much less directly) provides criticism about
the ability of a single investment to foster real economic growth, particularly in area experiencing decades of
disinvestment.

Despite the strong policy debates and positions surrounding modern streetcars in U.S. city, we know nothing
about the perspectives of planners and public sector staff implementing streetcar projects. Modern streetcars are
complex amalgams of public goals and policy related to urban transportation and economic development. The ability
of a streetcar project to deliver on its promises – both regarding economic development and transportation
benefits and project time lines and budgets - are largely contingent on the ability of local actors to work
cooperatively across government sectors that have traditionally been isolated from one another. Project  impact
and financial burdens can vary substantially across projects and may be the result of decisions made about
implementation or made during the implementation process by local planners and public sector staff.
Using semi-structured interviews from planners and policymakers in Kansas City, MO, this paper documents the
perspectives of local project implementers while also documenting the key challenges faced during the
implementation process. Do local planners and policy officials categorize the streetcar project as an economic
development or a transportation project? Do perspectives vary with the respondent’s job assignment or role in
the project? According to local implementers, who “owns” this project? How do departmental oversight and
work responsibilities align with how the project is perceived – i.e. who are the lead agencies; how do economic
development and transportation agencies work together in project implementation? Is the Kansas City project
categorized by a collaborative, comprehensive planning approach or do bureaucratic arrangements hinder
collaboration, as the literature suggests they may?
Preliminary interviews indicate that project implementers in Kansas City, MO view the streetcar as both a
transport project and an economic development stimulus. If this view is pervasive among project staffers (a claim
the interviews will test), how do implementers navigate conflicts in policy prescriptions provided by two different
frameworks? How are demands for increased parking to serve retail districts balanced with the need to reduce
parking to make streetcar more attractive to riders? How do demands for a larger residential population for both
transport and economic development reasons react to developer’s decisions to build additional office or retail
space?
How institutional factors influence modern streetcar implementation is unknown, but evidence from other
systems suggests that attempts to coordinate  land_use and transportation policy face severe barriers. Such
barriers may prevent local actors from working in the collaborative, complimentary manner that is necessary to
integrating economic development and transportation policy. This paper is part of a larger dissertation that
investigating the institutional issues involved with streetcar implementation with the goals of identifying the
intended and unintended consequences of the particular financing and governance arrangements being used in
U.S. city. By increasing our understanding of how local actors perceive new streetcar investments and negotiate
implementation conflicts, I hope to illustrate how holistic, integrated planning can be achieved in the future.
References
 Low, N. and Curtis, C. (2012). Institutional Barriers to Sustainable Transport. Ashgate Publishing.
 Smith-Heimer, J., & Golem, R. (2010). TCRP Synthesis 86: Relationships Between Streetcars and the Built
Environment.
 Curtis, C., Renne, J. L., & Bertolini, L. (2009). Transit Oriented Development: Making it Happen. Ashgate
Publishing, Ltd.
 Urban Land Institute (1979.). Joint development: Making the real estate-transit connection. Washington.

Abstract Index #: 772
TRANSIT INVESTMENT, NEIGHBORHOOD CHANGE, AND HOUSEHOLD TRAVEL VARIATION: LONGITUDINAL
FINDINGS FROM MULTIPLE US city
Abstract System ID#: 825
Individual Paper
ZHANG, Wenjia [University of Texas at Austin] wenjiazhang@utexas.edu, presenting author, primary author
ZHANG, Ming [University of Texas at Austin] zhangm@mail.utexas.edu

The growing concern on congestion and vehicle emissions has motivated persistent search for effective strategies
to reduce driving and automobile dependency. Voluminous studies have investigated whether transit investment
and building high-density and mixed-use neighborhood can promote public transit use, biking, and walking and
lower vehicle miles of travel (VMT) (e.g., Badoe and Miller, 2000; Ewing and Cervero, 2010; Boarnet, 2011).
However, most of the empirical studies are cross-sectional in nature. This largely constrains researchers to
address two important questions: whether the  land_use-travel connection varies over time and whether a shift in
neighborhood’s built environment can lead to a change in travel behavior in a dynamic perspective? The answers
to these questions are critical to understand the causality among transit development,  land_use policy, and
travel consequences and to compare the effectiveness of various mobility strategies.
Longitudinal data and analysis can help avoid the deficiencies of cross-sectional studies. The major barrier to
longitudinal  land_use-travel study is the difficulties of collecting multi-year individual travel information. Since
substantial  land_use change often occurs over a sustained period of time, the time interval between any two
household travel surveys need to be considerably long. There are mainly two categories of such longitudinal
studies (Raudenbush, 1989). The first is a panel study, in which data is collected by the repeated survey of
individuals across multiple years. This type of longitudinal data is rarely found in planning practice, due to the
respondent’s concern with privacy and frequently residential mobility in large US city. The second is a trend
study, which often collects data from comparable neighborhood over time but from different individuals inside
these neighborhood. In recent years, the data sets for trend studies have become available in many
metropolitans, though recent literature still barely uses them to explore the longitudinal  land_use effect on travel.
This study attempts to fill the gap, developing a longitudinal multilevel model (LMM) to simultaneously estimate
the changing roles of neighborhood  land_use characteristics and the effects of transit development and
neighborhood change on travel variation. The study investigates the data of household travel surveys (HTS) in
two occasions between 1990 and 2010 from 14 US metropolitans. Neighborhood  land_use characteristics are
measured based on traffic analysis zones. The LMM selects individual’s daily VMT as the dependent variable and
 land_use density, transit access, and street designs of the neighborhood where the individual resides in as
neighborhood-level  land_use variables. Control variables include individual-level socio-demographical attributes,
neighborhood-level social factors, and metropolitan-level characteristics.
Our preliminary findings show that the short- and long- run effectiveness of transit investment and  land_use
policies on VMT reduction may be very different. These results validate the importance of longitudinal data and
analysis in  land_use-travel studies, suggesting that the short-run  land_use elasticity derived from cross-sectional
analyses may be inappropriate for assessing the long-run effect of  land_use-based mobility strategies for reducing
driving.
References
 Badoe, D., and E. Miller. Transportation- land_use Interaction: Empirical Findings in North America, and
Their Implications for Modeling. Transportation Research Part D, No.5, 2000, pp. 235-263.
 Ewing, R., and R. Cervero. 2010. Travel and the Built Environment: A Meta-Analysis. Journal of the
American Planning Association, Vol. 76, No. 3: 265–294.
 Boarnet, M. G. 2011. A Broader Context for  land_use and Travel Behavior, and a Research Agenda.
Journal of the American Planning Association Vol. 77, No. 3, pp. 197-213.
 Raudenbush, S. W. The Analysis of Longitudinal, Multilevel Data. International Journal of Educational
Research, Vol. 13, No.7, 1989, pp. 721-740.

Abstract Index #: 773
THE IMPACT OF BUS RAPID TRANSIT DEVELOPMENT ON NEW FIRM FORMATION: CASE STUDY OF BRT system
IN SALT LAKE CITY, EUGENE, AND CLEVELAND
Abstract System ID#: 833
Individual Paper

KIM, Keuntae [University of Utah] kimprins@hotmail.com
Various public transportation system have been developed over the last two decades to provide people with
better accessibility to their destinations. Among these transportation system, bus rapid transit (BRT) system
have recently gained in popularity as an effective transit alternative that can be developed at a lower cost than
other transit modes. Also, like other transit system, most literature suggests bus rapid transit system can
improve connectivity within city by making the street network less car-dependent, improving environment
quality, and enhancing economic growth while developing and operating at a relatively low cost.
Recent literature on public transit system analyzes their  impact on economic growth and development at
various spatial levels—from neighborhood to regional levels. Particularly, system type-specific return-oninvestment has been one of the critical issues to support justifications of these transit system (Cervero and Dai,
2014; Melo, Graham, and Noland, 2010). Generally, studies about the impact of public infrastructure on firm
location suggest that public infrastructure investment influences on firm location decisions because effective
public infrastructure provides firms with better connectivity, reducing their fixed costs (Egger and Falkinger,
2006). Other studies argue that after introduction of rail transit, economic activities, including new firms, are
concentrated along the transit corridor or station. This suggests that in the long term, better transit access can
encourage firm agglomeration via firm relocation, and new firm formation along the transit corridors can play a
major role in justifying transit investment (Chatman and Noland 2011, 2013). Although recent research about the
impact of light rail system on new firm formation finds that firms tend to cluster around the transit stations,
there has been almost no research analyzing the  impact of bus rapid transit system in terms of new firm
formation along BRT corridors, which is a main goal of this study.
To address this gap, this paper analyzes firm-level data around the BRT corridor and stations by using InfoGroup
Business data, which includes individual firm profiles throughout the U.S. Specifically, this study assesses the
number of new firms and the change in employment over time in existing, relocated, and new firms. Secondly,
this paper will seek to understand the change in the composition of employment by industry before and after the
installment of BRT. For accurate analysis and generalization of the results, this paper focuses on three
representative BRT case studies: the 3500 South MAX BRT in Salt Lake City, UT; the HealthLine in Cleveland, OH;
and the Emerald Express (EmX) in Eugene, OR. This paper hypothesizes that there is a clear difference in new firm
formation before and after the BRT routes open, and that the development and investment in BRT projects can
revitalize area around the BRT corridor by attracting new firms and by serving as a key driver for the growth of
agglomeration economies in the city.
References
 Cervero, R., & Dai, D., 2014. BRT TOD: Leveraging transit oriented development with bus rapid transit
investments. transportation Policy, 36, pp. 127–138.
 Chatman, D.G. & Noland, R.B., 2011. Do Public transportation Improvements Increase Agglomeration
Economies? A Review of Literature and an Agenda for Research. transportation Reviews, 31(6), pp.725–742.
 Chatman, D.G. & Noland, R.B., 2013. Transit Service, Physical Agglomeration and Productivity in US
Metropolitan area. Urban Studies, 51(5), pp.917–937.
 Egger, H. & Falkinger, J., 2006. The role of public infrastructure and subsidies for firm location and
international outsourcing. European Economic Review, 50(8), pp.1993–2015.
 Melo, P., Graham, D. & Noland, R., 2010. Impact of transportation Infrastructure on Firm Formation.
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2163(-1), pp.133–143.

Abstract Index #: 774
THE USE OF SKATEBOARDS A MODE OF TRANSPORTATION AND RAMIFICATIONS FOR TRANSPORTATION
PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 837
Individual Paper
FANG, Kevin [University of California, Davis] kfang@ucdavis.edu

The “Complete Streets” perspective of transportation planning holds that all travelers should be accounted for
regardless of mode (LaPlante and McCann, 2008). This is based on the idea that planning should not just consider
automobiles, but alternatives such as transit, walking, and bicycling. However, as FHWA (2004) outlines, these are
not the only alternatives that transportation planners are encountering. For example, skateboards, usually
thought of as a recreational device, can and are being used for transportation.
Skateboard travel has become noticeable enough in some places that travel surveys have begun to count
skateboarding as a unique mode choice. According to the California Household Travel Survey, skateboarders and
users of similar non-motorized devices travel an estimated 48 million miles per year. Several universities in
California have found skateboard mode shares in the low-to-mid single digits and rising shares over the last
several years. Observations conducted by the City of Portland, Oregon found skateboard travelers present at 79
percent of intersections studied.
Given the presence of skateboard travelers, this paper focuses on two central questions: (1) What are the
characteristics of skateboard travelers? Who are they? Why do they skateboard? (2) What are the ramifications
for planning? Data comes from several sources including qualitative, in-depth interviews with skateboard
commuters, observations of skateboarders, and review of available statistics on skateboarding, such as safety
data.
This research has uncovered several interesting findings about skateboard travel. Skateboarding appears to be
viable for trips up to a couple miles, with a catchment area larger than for walking. Skateboarding also appears to
be amenable to multi-modal trips since skateboards can be easily carried onto transit vehicles or automobiles.
Skateboards are used for "first-mile" or "last-mile" access on these multi-modal trips.
Skateboarding is also most popular among younger age groups. Thus, skateboarding could be a particularly
interesting alternative mode for planners interested in youth travel and issues such as providing physical activity
through travel and independent travel for non-driving kids and teenagers.
Skateboarders, while making an uncommon mode choice, can be characterized by the same thought process as
other travelers, as articulated, for example, in the “Theory of Routine Mode Choice Decisions” (Schneider, 2013).
Skateboarders do find skateboarding fun, however convenience is a top rated motivation. Skateboard travelers
do face noticeable policy barriers, however, particularly rules targeted at restricting recreational skateboarding.
As Nemeth (2006) outlines, recreational skateboarders are not well regarded by decision makers and
communities frequently seek to exclude them from the public realm. Such prohibitions can prevent
skateboarding from being a legal travel mode to many destinations.
References
 Federal Highway Administration. (2004). Characteristics of Emerging Road and Trail Users and Their
Safety. McLean, VA.
 LaPlante, J., & McCann, B. (2008). Complete streets: We can get there from here. ITE journal, 78(5), 24.
 Nemeth, J. (2006). Conflict, Exclusion, Relocation: Skateboarding and Public Space. Journal of Urban
Design, 11(3), 297-318.
 Schneider, R. (2013). Theory of routing mode choice decisions: An operational framework to increase
sustainable transportation. transportation Policy, 25, 128-137.

Abstract Index #: 775
IMPROVING THE RELIABILITY OF TRAVEL SURVEY DATA FOR SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORTATION: DAY-TO-DAY
TRAVEL VARIABILITY AND THE “OPTIMAL” SURVEY DURATION
Abstract System ID#: 843
Individual Paper
LI, Wei [Texas A&M University] wli@tamu.edu, presenting author, primary author

HOUSTON, Douglas [University of California, Irvine] houston@uci.edu
BOARNET, Marlon [University of Southern California] boarnet@usc.edu
PARK, Han [Texas A&M University] hpark@tamu.edu
Reliable travel data are essential to evaluating the environment and health impact of smart growth strategies.
While improved knowledge about the variability of transit, walking and biking travel across multiple days become
increasingly necessary, the single-day travel survey (SDTS) still represents the archetypal duration of data
collection among travel surveys conducted at the national, state or regional levels. The basic assumption in the
conventional SDTS approach is that travel activities are repetitive from day to day, and if travel is reported for a
randomly chosen day out of some longer time period, then an unbiased sample of behavior for that period can be
obtained. Previous studies have challenged the SDTS approach, but the implication of survey duration on travel
parameter estimates is still largely unknown; accordingly, there is little agreement on the “optimal” travel survey
duration for accuracy of travel demand modeling. By analyzing a sample of seven-day travel logs from the City of
Los Angeles, California (USA) during 2011-2012, we aim to contribute the understanding of intrapersonal day-today travel variability (IDTV) and the implication of travel survey duration on parameter estimates.
Our final sample included 2,395 person-days from 352 individual respondents. Our analytical methods included
linear regressions and Monte Carlo simulation experiments. Our linear models revealed that a number of factors
significantly influenced IDTV, such as gender, age, income, and automobile ownership. However, the observed
characteristics could only explain a very small portion of IDTV: 2% for the total trip count, 5% for the private
vehicle trip count, 12% for the bus/train trip count, 4% for the walking/biking trip count, and 4% for the duration
of walk/biking. There was a tremendous amount of residual IDTV that was hard to explain by observable
characteristics; this may pose a risk to the validity of results from single-day surveys.
In order to better understand the risk and elucidate the influence of survey duration on travel parameter
estimates, we also conducted Monte Carlo simulation experiments, which enabled us to contrast travel variables
measured from the seven-day master sample with those from subsamples of a shorter period (one to six days).
We found that it is possible for a less-than-seven-day period to generate parameter estimates close enough to
the seven-day period; the “optimal” duration for a travel survey may be dependent on the specific travel
variables measured and the desired accuracy levels. Regarding total trip counts and private vehicle trip counts,
three days of survey duration may produce estimates that are very close to the estimates from the seven-day
survey. Walking/biking trip counts may need at least five days of survey duration to produce estimates that are
likely (about 90% chance) to approach those from the seven-day survey. Bus/train trips may be subject to the
largest degree of uncertainty among all modes in terms of repetitiveness of travel; therefore, we recommend the
seven-day duration for bus/train trips since estimates about bus/train trip frequencies from a less-than-sevenday survey duration may be associated with high risks of bias.
In conclusion, the conventional one-day approach is highly likely to produce biased parameter estimates due to
the intrapersonal day-to-day travel variability. We recommend that transportation professionals and policy
makers consider shifting from the conventional one-day approach towards the multi-day approach; surveys
which focus on the modes of walking, biking and transit should consider data collection from a duration of at
least seven days.
References
 Hanson, S., & Huff, J. O. (1988). Systematic variability in repetitious travel. Transportation, 15(1), pp.111135.
 Pas, E. I. (1986). Multiday samples, parameter estimation precision, and data collection costs for least
squares regression trip-generation models. Environment and Planning A, 18(1), pp.73-87.
 Pas, E. I. (1987). Intrapersonal variability and model goodness-of-fit. Transportation Research Part A:
General, 21(6), pp.431-438.
 Stopher, P. R., & Zhang, Y. (2011). Repetitiveness of Daily Travel. Transportation Research Record:
Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2230(1), pp.75-84.



Venter, Christoffel J, & Joubert, Johan W. (2013). Use of Multisource Global Positioning System Data to
Characterize Multiday Driving Patterns and Fuel Usage in a Large Urban Region. Transportation Research
Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2338(1), pp.1-10.

Abstract Index #: 776
EVALUATING PARKING AND TRANSPORTATION MODE CHOICES USING A NESTED LOGIT MODEL
Abstract System ID#: 854
Individual Paper
NG, Wei Shiuen [University of California, Berkeley] wei-shiuen.ng@berkeley.edu
Parking pricing policy can apply to commuter, non-commuter and residential parking, and address a variety of
financial, social, economic, and environment objectives. In particular, parking pricing policy can generate
revenue for operators, serve as tools to support commercial success and residential quality of life, and at the
same time help manage travel demand, reduce congestion, travel time, and vehicular emissions (Shoup 2005;
Greene and Schafer, 2003). Pricing is also one of the most effective measures in lowering transportation carbon
dioxide emissions (Cambridge Systematics, Inc., 2009; Barbour and Deakin, 2012). Using the University of
California (UC), Berkeley as a study site, this study examines employee responses to alternative parking pricing
strategies that account for location and provide incentives to reduce drive alone trips and the use of parking on
campus. An original transportation and parking survey consisting of revealed and stated preference questions
was designed for the purpose of this study, to evaluate the potential shifts in transportation mode share, trip
frequency and parking behavior as parking pricing changes. Stated preference data have been widely used to
study mode choice, to analyze the impact of transportation policy on travel demand using hypothetical
scenarios and also for forecasting (Hensher, 1994), but fewer studies have applied this approach on parking
pricing. The transportation and parking survey was sent to the entire UC Berkeley faculty and staff population of
approximately 12,000 and received a 35 percent response rate with 4,188 respondents. Questions in the survey
covered respondent’s personal and household characteristics, job characteristics, mode choice for a week,
parking choices on the day they last commuted to campus, and reactions to a series of parking pricing scenarios.
Alternative parking pricing strategies provided in the parking pricing scenarios included changes in daily parking
rates, reduced or eliminated monthly discounts for daily parking and incentives for public transportation use.
Each choice set contained four parking choices followed by 11 transportation modal alternatives for each day of
the week. The parking choices included, 1) a conventional campus parking permit that offers unlimited parking at
a monthly cost; 2) a restricted monthly campus parking permit that allows for parking three days a week or four
days a week; 3) a daily campus parking permit, and 4) an hourly parking option at an off-campus location. The
transportation model alternatives presented in the survey included drive alone using the chosen parking option;
drive alone but park elsewhere; carpool or vanpool; motorcycle, moped, or scooter; bus; train; bike; walk only;
other; work from home, and not on campus. Hence, data collected from the survey were used to construct a
nested logit model, in order to connect parking and transportation mode choices and to evaluate the impact of
parking pricing on mode choice. Nested logit models allow analyses of alternatives that are closely related by
accounting for within-group correlation of errors and have a closed form probability function that includes a
conditional probability and marginal probability. In this study, transportation mode choices are conditioned upon
parking choices. The degree of potential change in mode choice depends on different demographic and
socioeconomic factors, as well as current transportation demand and behavior. This study contributes to the
parking pricing literature by evaluating its efficacy and employee interest in employer based incentives. Results
from this study also provide insights on the interaction between parking pricing policy that are coupled with
incentives for non-driving modes and the flexibility of work schedule. In addition, this study presents a detailed
analysis of user groups who will be affected by changes in parking pricing policy, a consideration not previously
examined in any detail in current literature.
References
 Shoup, D. (2005) The High Cost of Free Parking. American Planning Association Planners Press.







Greene, D. L. and A. Schafer. (2003) Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions from U.S. Transportation.
Prepared for the Pew Center on Global Climate Change. Pew Center on Global Climate Change,
Arlington.
Cambridge Systematics, Inc. (2009) Moving Cooler: An Analysis of Transportation Strategies for
Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Urban Land Institute, Washington DC.
Barbour, E. and E. A. Deakin. (2012) Smart growth planning for climate protection: Evaluating
California’s Senate Bill 375. Journal of the American Planning Association 78(1): 70-86.
Hensher, D. A. (1994) Stated preference analysis of travel choices: the state of practice. Transportation
21: 107-133.

Abstract Index #: 777
TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT AND NEIGHBORHOOD CHANGE ALONG THE LIGHT RAIL SYSTEM: THE
SOCIAL EQUITY IMPACT OF THE METRO BLUE LINE IN LOS ANGELES
Abstract System ID#: 859
Poster
SUNG, Seyoung [Portland State University] seyoung@pdx.edu, presenting author, primary author
GIBSON, Karen [Portland State University] gibsonk@pdx.edu
Traditionally, planners, policymakers, and transportation scholars have agreed that transit investment has
continuously and significantly changed the surrounding neighborhood. Although early studies about transit
oriented development were focused on urban formations and  land_use pattern adjacent to transit stations,
recent emerging concerns emphasize on equity issues such as gentrification and displacement that accompanied
the transit system. Most city that invested in transit system have experienced considerable demographic,
socio-economic changes in their neighborhood (Bluestone and Billingham, 2010).
The Blue Line in the Los Angeles area was built twenty-three years ago on existing rail lines over twenty-two miles
between downtown Los Angeles and Long Beach. With twenty-two stations, the line passes through the most
neglected and disadvantaged comminuty in Los Angeles County and also through large segments of abandoned
industrial lands. The Blue Line was supposed to promote economic development in the area adjacent to the rail
line. However, the comminuty in proximity still remain marginalized. Many researchers point out that the
region’s disproportionate lack of economic development despite light rail transit is due to a lack of integrated
approach that encompasses the need of core riders and private sector’s diverse interests (Loukaitou-Sideris and
Banerjee, 2000). A number of abandoned lands along the Blue Line still wait for the reinvestment opportunity
even now.
This report set out to evaluate and compare specific neighborhood changes along the Metro Blue Line in Los
Angeles County in the viewpoint of their social equity impact. In order to better understand patterns of
neighborhood change in proximity to the transit stations, comparison analysis was conducted based on
socioeconomic and demographic changes in twenty-two area designated Walksheds by the Metro Blue Line. The
concept of Walksheds were used as the units of analysis, which was defined as the area within a half-mile walking
distance from the transit station (Metropolitan Area Planning Council, 2014). The comparison analysis between
Los Angeles County and neighborhood in proximity to the Metro Blue Line stations used a series of social
demographic indicators. Setting the start point at 1990, comparison analysis was employed to observe the
pattern of change in the region by decennial data, followed by 2000 and 2010. While looking at change through
time series data analysis vertically, the performance of each station area was examined horizontally. Therefore,
comparative analysis was conducted in four stages to figure out the extent to which the neighborhood have
changed, how rapidly the change occurred and whether the neighborhood change occurred in a positive way or
not.
According to the results, the Metro Blue line positively affected the neighborhood in the vicinity of the rail line
over time. At the same time, the result revealed that some of neighborhood close to the rail line experienced
displacement. Moreover, while some positive neighborhood change has occurred in the Walksheds, the area still

tended to be located in the City’s lower income area, so making equity a key priority in future citywide TOD
strategy. In fact, it could be seen as a failure to meet the goal of maximizing equity and fostering greater
opportunities for upward economic mobility, since it accelerated unbalanced development between twenty-two
station area according to the result and most of neighborhood along the rail line corridor still remains as the
most marginalized neighborhood in Los Angeles County.
References
 Center for Transit Oriented Development (2010) Creating Successful Transit-Oriented Districts in Los
Angeles: A Citywide Toolkit for Achieving Regional Goals.
 Lisa Schweitzer (2012) Transit-Oriented Classism in Los Angeles, A Look at the Ghetto Blue,
http://www.plannersnetwork.org/2012/07/summer-2012-los-angeles-what-future-for-the-city-of-thefuture/
 Loukaitou-Sideris A. and Banerjee T. (2000) “The Blue line Blues: Why The Vision of Transit Village May
Not Materialize Despite Impressive Growth in Transit Ridership”, Journal of Urban Design, Vol. 5, pp.101125
 Metropolitan Area Planning Council (2014) The dimensions of displacement: Baseline Data for Managing
Neighborhood Change in Somerville’s Green Line Corridor.
 Pollack, S., Bluestone, B., Billingham, C. (2010) Maintaining Diversity in America’s Transit-Rich
Neighborhoods: Tools for Equitable Neighborhood Change. Boston, MA: Durakis Center for Urban and
Regional Policy.

Abstract Index #: 778
THE IMPACT OF URBAN FORM AND GASOLINE PRICES ON VEHICLE USAGE: EVIDENCE FROM THE 2009
NATIONAL HOUSEHOLD TRAVEL SURVEY
Abstract System ID#: 862
Individual Paper
DILLON, Harya [University of California, Irvine] hdillon@uci.edu, presenting author, primary author
SAPHORES, Jean-Daniel [UC Irvine] saphores@uci.edu
BOARNET, Marlon [University of Southern California] boarnet@usc.edu
This paper relies on generalized structural equation modeling (SEM) to tease out the relationship between land
use, gasoline prices and travel behavior. We analyze data from the Southern California subsample of the 2009
National Household Travel Survey (NHTS), which has a quasi-experimental nature thanks to large exogenous
variations in gasoline prices during the administration of the NHTS (March 2008-April 2009). Our joint models of
residential urban form, vehicle efficiency choice, and vehicle use account for residential self-selection and
endogeneity of vehicle preferences in order to explain vehicle miles traveled (VMT) for both work and non-work
trips. Residential urban form is treated as a latent construct that reflects observed variables such as population
density,  land_use diversity and distance to employment centers. Our results suggest that in the short run,
households drive 0.15% less for all trips and 0.18% less for non-work trips when gas prices increase by 1%, while
work trips are not responsive to gasoline price changes. Moreover, the direct effect of residential urban form on
driving is statistically significant for total and non-work VMT, but it has no impact on work trips. We also find that
owners of more fuel efficient vehicles tend to be more educated, Asian and younger (under 30). Moreover,
households in low density neighborhood are more likely to have a higher income, to be older than 65 and either
White or Asian; these households tend to own more vehicles per driver. Finally, our results show that accounting
for the nature of trips is important for understanding the short term price elasticity of travel.
References
 Boarnet, M., Houston, D., Ferguson, G., & Spears, S. (2011).  land_use and vehicle miles of travel in the
climate change debate: Getting smarter than your average bear. In Y.-H. Hong & G. K. Ingram (Eds.),
Climate Change and Land policy (pp. 151–187). Puritan Press Inc. Retrieved from
https://www.lincolninst.edu/pubs/2038_Land-Use-and-Vehicle-Miles-of-Travel-in-the-Climate-ChangeDebate






Boarnet, M. (2011). A Broader Context for  land_use and Travel Behavior, and a Research Agenda.
Journal of the American Planning Association, 77(3), 197–213. doi:10.1080/01944363.2011.593483
Bagley, M. N., & Mokhtarian, P. L. (2002). The impact of residential neighborhood type on travel
behavior: A structural equations modeling approach. Annals of Regional Science, 36(2), 279–297.
Brownstone, D., & Golob, T. F. (2009). The impact of residential density on vehicle usage and energy
consumption. Journal of Urban Economics, 65(1), 91–98. doi:10.1016/j.jue.2008.09.002
Cao, X. (Jason), Mokhtarian, P. L., & Handy, S. L. (2009a). Examining the  impact of Residential Self‐
Selection on Travel Behaviour: A Focus on Empirical Findings. transportation Reviews (Vol. 29, pp. 359–395).
doi:10.1080/01441640802539195

Abstract Index #: 779
THE EFFECT OF SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM ON SHRINKING city
Abstract System ID#: 922
Individual Paper
GU, Donghwan [Texas A&M University] hejong84@gmail.com, presenting author, primary author
NEWMAN, Galen [Texas A&M University] gnewman@arch.tamu.edu
Neighborhood decline has become a critical problem in shrinking and deindustrializing city. The issues of vacant
property accumulation and abandonment have been amplified by concentrations of low income neighborhood
and underinvestment in transportation infrastructure in comminuty. Based on this problem, this paper
examines the relationship between vacant properties and accessibility to components of sustainable
transportation such as walkability and proximity to transit. If accessibility to sustainable transportation enhances
benefits to land owners and renters, then it could help prevent urban decline in adjacent area.
To assess the relationship between land abandonment and sustainable transportation, this paper uses a logistic
regression analysis. The dependent variable is abandoned lots, which is based on parcel level property tax
information. Binary data is utilized to designate whether the land is vacant or occupied. In addition, to compare
the differences between  land_uses, individual lots are categorized according to usage: residential and
commercial. Thus, this paper contains two models with each dependent variables.
Walkability, proximity to the transit, and proximity to the major roads - freeway, arterial and collector roads - by
each lots is calculated using Geographic Information System (GIS). Also, this research considers four more
independent variables based on the literature review: 1) number of abandoned buildings in unit area; 2) property
value; 3) total floor area; and 4) passed years after construction. The study boundary is set to the city of Dayton,
Ohio, USA. Property tax data, land property maps, and infrastructure maps were gathered from the city of
Dayton GIS and Montgomery County Real Estate databases.
According to the preliminary results, the proximity to major roads, number of abandoned buildings, and property
value has significant influence on land abandonment for residential and commercial buildings.
References
 Galen Newman

Abstract Index #: 780
ARE PUBLIC STREETS BECOMING PRIVATE SPACES? IMPLICATIONS FOR transportation POLICY
Abstract System ID#: 867
Individual Paper
KING, David [Columbia University] dk2475@columbia.edu

The past decade has dramatic change in local transportation policy and planning in U.S. city. As auto travel has
peaked or even declined, walking, cycling, taxi services and goods movement have increased dramatically
nationwide. Public transit ridership has grown in many city as well. These gains can be attributed in part to
planning efforts to increase the supply of alternatives to driving. However, part of this revolutionary decade is the
emergence of private transportation alternatives to private cars by responding to real and perceived demand.
Taxi services, goods movement, bike sharing, car sharing, parking management and bus services have developed
as private responses to the troubles of congestion, access and mobility.
These private actors both solve existing problems within transportation policy, such as limited taxi services or access to
bicycles, and introduce new concerns, including allocation of street space. A common thread tying private
services together is that they provide meaningful alternatives to driving, which may help reduce dependence on
automobiles for getting around. However, while reducing auto usage is a desirable planning goal, private
transportation firms operate outside of conventional planning processes. Taxis, shared vehicles and delivery
trucks all increase the demand for street space and curb access but contribute little to the maintenance of local
streets, and they subvert existing regulations and planning of street space.
In this research I examine two distinct but related aspects of private use of street space. First, I place recent
transportation developments in the context of privatization efforts in planning and policy that have occurred over
the past few decades. These developments are incremental changes from what came before, and recent
developments in taxis, shared vehicles and goods movement are more evolutionary than revolutionary. Second, I
look at how private actors are pushing local transportation policy toward narrow goals that may not serve the
public best. Currently city are particularly vulnerable to claims as they are expected to shoulder a greater
burden on transportation funding and policy, yet city are extremely constrained in their ability to raise revenues
through taxes and user fees. As city accept and allow more private firms that promote and accept
transportation policy that serve narrow goals just because private dollars are involved, yet evidence suggests
that private pressures will lead to public investment.
I use evidence from New York City taxicabs, bike share, traffic enforcement and transit usage to analyze how
private actors affect transportation policy at the local level. I connect these data and analyses with the literature
addressing privatization of public assets and private governance. Initial conclusions suggest that city and
planners are being pushed into new area of regulation and policy without public involvement, and that city are
presently poorly equipped to adequately address these new actor in transportation policy.
References
 Appleyard, D. (1980). "Livable streets: protected neighborhood?" The ANNALS of the American
Academy of Political and Social Science 451(1): 106-117.
 Foldvary, F. E. (2006). "Public goods and private comminuty: the market provision of social services."
 King, M. and R. Chellman (2014). "Real Urban Intersection Design: Expanding on Complete Streets
Chicago and NACTO Urban Streets Design Guide." ITE Journal 84(5).
 Montgomery, M. R. and R. Bean (1999). "Market failure, government failure, and the private supply of
public goods: The case of climate-controlled walkway networks." Public Choice 99(3-4): 403-437
 Moudon, A. V. (1987). Public streets for public use, Van Nostrand Reinhold New York.

Abstract Index #: 781
BICYCLE EDUCATION: THE MISSING LINK
Abstract System ID#: 873
Individual Paper
BUTCHER, Mary [University of Virginia] marybutcher21@gmail.com
Safe, convenient cycling for children and adults alike is a common aspirational objective of planners seeking to
reduce driving and promote alternative modes of travel. To facilitate this objective, city have built more bike
routes, improved other features of bike infrastructure, and supported policy like Safe Routes to School.

However, there is a missing link in many American city’ approaches to cycling—bicycle education. A lack of
understanding and training leads cyclists to break the law almost daily. In many situations, cyclists and car drivers
do not know how to interact. In 2012, 726 cyclists were killed and an additional 49,000 were injured in crashes
with motor vehicles in the United States (NHTSA, 2012). Despite the increase in cycling, and serious safety
concerns, there is relatively little research or understanding of bicycle education in the United States, among
transportation planners or educators (McDonald, 2012). While piecemeal education and training program are
the norm in the United States, the approach in several European countries where cycling among both children
and adults is significantly safer and more prevalent is to take a comprehensive, lifecycle approach to bicycle
education, with program and experiences directed to specific ages throughout childhood. While it would need
to be geared to the American context, I argue that this approach to bicycle education is a key component of
preparing both future cyclist and drivers for safer, saner experiences on the road.
Case studies of several northern European city’ bicycle education program, including practitioner and parent
interviews, on-site program observation, and reviews of curricula and policy demonstrate this lifecycle
approach to education. city studied include Copenhagen, Denmark, Utrecht, Netherlands, and Münster,
Germany. The cases demonstrate that bicycle education is precisely geared to individual age groups from birth
through teens to help build cycling confidence, traffic knowledge, and a contextual understanding of cycling.
Many actors are engaged in bicycle education, and local and national transportation agencies have established a
range of strategies and policy to teach children how to cycle through city. program include cycling tests,
extensive education at a national level, and "traffic gardens," where students learn cycling in a simulated road
environment. Overall, the case studies largely view bicycle education as a social phenomenon, with outcomes
measured by planners not just in terms of individual cycling behavior, but community acceptance and support for
the mode.
The European model of bicycle education may be a guide for creating a more comprehensive approach in the
United States. While infrastructure and enforcement remain key components of multifaceted approach to
cycling the US, both individual safety and social acceptance could be enhanced with a more broad-based
approach to education that engages throughout childhood.
References
 Boufous, Soufiane, Liz de Rome, Teresa Senserrick, Rebecca Ivers. “Cycling Crashes in Children,
Adolescents, and Adults: A Comparative Analysis.” Traffic Injury Prevention 12:3 (2011): 244-250.
 McDonald, Noreen. "Children and Cycling." City Cycling. Ed. John Pucher and Ralph Buehler. London: The
MIT Press, 2012. 235-56. Print.
 NHTSA (National Highway Traffic Safety Administration) and US Department of Transportation. May
2014. Quick Facts 2012. http://www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/812006.pdf

Abstract Index #: 782
PUBLIC transportation AND UNEVEN LAND VALUE BETTERMENT: EVIDENCE FROM CHINA AND UK
Abstract System ID#: 877
Individual Paper
WANG, Yiming [University College London] yiming.wang@ucl.ac.uk
Does planning intended for equity always lead to equity as a result of planning? The answer turns out to be no
based on two case studies regarding the impact of public transportation infrastructure on local property price,
respectively in the city of Cardiff, UK and the municipality of Shanghai, China. In the both cases, quantile hedonic
analysis suggests that the positive externalities of public transportation network are rather unevenly distributed, with
the spatial adjacency to public transit adding unproportionally more to the values of most expensive properties
than those at the lower end of the local real estate market. This finding presents a paradox, that publicly invested
transport infrastructure aiming for equitable mobility may however intensify the economic inequalities within the
local property market. Land value tax, in the tradition of Henry George (1879), appears to be a promising and
nowadays technologically viable public finance intervention to resolve this problem (Wang et al, 2015). In the

meantime, a critical reflection is needed on the very conception of equity planning per se. Equity, must not only
be a normative planning goal, but also an empirically “fallible hypothesis” (Popper, 1959).
References
 Bowes, D. R. & K. R. Ihlanfeldt (2001) Identifying the  impact of Rail Transit Stations on Residential
Property Values. Journal of Urban Economics, 50, 1-25.
 George H. (1879) Progress and Poverty Reprinted 1962, New York: Schalkenberg
 Popper K R. (1959) The Logic of Scientific Discovery Reprinted 2002, New York: Routledge
 Ryan, S. (1999) Property Values and Transportation Facilities: Finding the Transportation- land_use
Connection. Journal of Planning Literature, 13, 412-427.
 Wang, Yiming, Dimitris Potoglou, Scott Orford and Yi Gong, (2015). “Bus Stop, Property Price, and Land
Value Tax: A Multilevel Hedonic Analysis with Quantile Calibration”  land_use Policy, 42, 381-391

Abstract Index #: 783
UNDERSTANDING THE ROLES OF DIFFERENT PLANNING AND ORGANIZATIONAL APPROACHES TO THE SUCCESS
OR FAILURE OF FIXED-ROUTE TRANSIT SERVICE CONTRACTING: A MULTIPLE CASE STUDY INVESTIGATION
Abstract System ID#: 880
Individual Paper
MENDEZ, Joel [Florida State University] jm14af@my.fsu.edu, presenting author
BROWN, Jeffrey [Florida State University] jrbrown3@fsu.edu
Transit policymakers have turned to service contracting as a means of reducing labor and other operation costs,
thereby potentially improving the cost effectiveness, service effectiveness, and service productivity of their
transit services. While much of the US literature on contracting has focused on documenting the cost and other
outcome measures of contracting efforts, there has been remarkably little attention paid to the role of planning
and other organizational factors in affecting the ultimate success or failure of a contracting effort.
There have been widely divergent outcomes among the metropolitan area that contract out more than 20
percent of their fixed-route transit services. San Diego and Denver stand out for their high levels of ridership and
low costs per rider and per unit of service. San Diego is widely known for its embrace of the transit federation
model where a public entity serves as a planning and coordinating body for an array of public and private
contract entities. Denver is also known for retaining the higher level planning and coordinating functions for
directly operated and contracted services inside the public entity. By contrast, New Orleans contracts out the
entirety of its planning and operations functions. The results there are much higher costs per ride and per unit of
service than in the prior two cases. Given the seeming importance of these different planning and organizational
approaches to the perceived success of contracting in San Diego and Denver and the weaker performance
elsewhere, and the relative absence of a focus on these issues in the US scholarly or practitioner literature
(although not the international literature), this is an important area of investigation.
The authors use a set of seven US cases to better understand whether there is relationship between the
particular approach to fixed-route service contracting and the cost effectiveness, service effectiveness, and
overall service productivity of the contracted transit service. These cases are developed using a combination of
National Transit Database data, transit agency data, review of agency documents, and key informant interviews.
The authors also propose to address a number of secondary research questions about the history, details,
operation, and performance of the contract arrangements in each of the case study area. By focusing on these
planning and operational issues, the study represents a very different approach than the typical literature on
contracting transit service, which evaluates only the outcomes of contracting in terms of its ability (or inability) to
reduce costs as compared to in-house service provision. By contrast, this project explores the importance that
less visible planning and operational choices may have on the success of contracting efforts. The lessons from this
study should help improve US transit practice by providing a clearer understanding of the role of planning and
organizational factors in the ultimate success or failure of contracting initiatives.

References
 Wallis, I. and D. Hensher. (2005). Competitive Tendering as a Contracting Mechanism for Subsidising
Transport: The Bus Experience. Journal of transportation Economics and Policy39 (3): 295-321
 Larwin, Tom. (2012). San Diego Metropolitan Transit Development Board: Lessons for Competitive
Transit Governance. Paper Prepared for Market-Oriented Reforms in Transit Symposium sponsored by
Rockefeller Foundation.
 National Center for Transit Research Report. (2011).Analysis of Contracting for Fixed Route Bus Service.
Report prepared for the Florida Department of Transportation.
 McCullough, W.S. III, B.D. Taylor, and M. Wachs. (1998). Transit Service Contracting and Cost-Efficiency.
Transportation Research Record 1618:69-77.
 Currie, G. (2009). A Review of Melbourne’s Rail Franchsing Methods Reforms.
Journeys.http://ltaacademy.gov.sg/doc/J09Nov-36Currie_RailFranchising.pdf accessed March 26, 2013.

Abstract Index #: 784
ANALYSIS OF THE GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION OF FIRMS IN RELATION TO METRO STATION PROXIMITY AND
HIGHWAY ACCESS: A CASE STUDY OF THE WMATA METRO SERVICE AREA
Abstract System ID#: 882
Individual Paper
GREENE, Cole [University of Maryland at College Park] cmgreene911@gmail.com
The level of accessibility within a region is largely dependent on the quality and amount of transportation
infrastructure. Improvements to this infrastructure through investment in transportation inherently change the
location of local economic activities by providing greater access to specific locations. Many transportation
practitioners and scholars have been touting transit oriented development (TOD) as a way to stimulate local
economic development and increase property values for the last 25 years. While there are studies that have
found that rail transit proximity and highway accessibility are associated with a higher concentration of firms and
employment overall (Cervero et al, 2010; Meija-Dorantes et al, 2012), there has been little empirical research to
examine these findings by industry.
Our study examines the geographic distribution of firms within the Washington DC region as a function of rail
station and highway accessibility, while controlling for other influential factors considered important regarding
firm location decisions. National Establishment Time Series (NETS) data for the year 2010, for Maryland and the
District of Columbia, which covers 66 stations of Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority (WMATA)
Metro service are the primary data source. The data set contains information on the location, size and operating
statistics of firms, and each recorded is assigned a North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code to
differentiate the industries of firms. Demographic data are obtained from the US Census.
In this paper, following an analysis of the location quotient of various industries to identify the relative
importance of industries within station area, we use Statewide Model Zones (SMZs) which are equivalent traffic
analysis zones in the Maryland Statewide Transportation Model (MSTM) as a unit of analysis, and apply a crosssectional regression to examine the effects of distance between each SMZ to the nearest Metro station and
highway entrance/exit. Distance is measured based on the street network, as opposed to Euclidean distance,
controlling for location within the CBD,  land_use, and common demographic factors, such as residential
population (total and/or density), income, age, race and ethnicity. We conduct our analysis by size of firm and by
industry type. In particular, accessibility between SMZs through the transportation network is taken into account
when incorporating demographic data, rather than simply using data within each SMZ.
Results of this study allow us to examine how proximity to transit and automobile access relates to firm density
by firm size and across industries within the DC/MD region. The findings from this study add to the literature of
TOD by not only examining the effects of attracting firms to station area, but also in showing how rail and
highway access may attract firms in unison. A greater understanding of this issue is important for local decision
makers as it may allow developers to better target their developments to specific industries based on the site’s

multi-modal access. Moreover, results pertaining to the distance of firms from rail access, as well as highway
access, are important in the context of land-use planning and zoning for local governments – as firms of various
sizes and within different industries might have clearly defined distance preferences that would align with zoning
for higher-densities in targeted area.
References
 Belzer, Dena, Sujata Srivastava, Mason Austin, Tyler Bump, and Jeff Wood. 2011. Transit and Regional
Economic Development. Center for Transit Oriented Development. FTA CA-26-1007-03. May 2011.
 Cervero, R., Komada, Y., and Krueger, A. 2010. Suburban Transformations: From Employment Centers to
Mixed-Use Activity Centers. University of California Transportation Center. UCTC-FR-2010-13.
 Graham, D. J. 2007. "Agglomeration, Productivity and transportation Investment". Journal of Transport
Economics and Policy. 41: 317-344.
 Mejia-Dorantes, L., A. Paez, and J.M. Vassallo. 2012. "Transportation infrastructure  impact on firm
location: the effect of a new metro line in the suburbs of Madrid". Journal of transportation Geography. 22:
236-250.
 Noland, Robert B, Daniel G Chatman, and Nicholas J Klein. 2014. "Transit Access and the Agglomeration
of New Firms: A Case Study of Portland and Dallas". Mineta Transportation Institute. 12 (15).

Abstract Index #: 785
DOES THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT MATTER? MEASURING THE EFFECTS OF CONTEXTUAL- AND INDIVIDUAL-LEVEL
DETERMINANTS ON INDUSTRIAL TOURISTS’ INTENTION TOWARDS BUS TRAVEL BY USING THE HLM ANALYSIS
Abstract System ID#: 885
Individual Paper
LIN, Li Pin [Mingchuan University, Taipei] lynnlin1970@yahoo.com
International tourism organizations have been addressing the issue of contribution of tourism activities in GHG
emissions. Many countries, such as France and USA, GHG emissions in tourism have been confirmed mostly from
transportation system (Dubois and Ceron, 2006). Moving to the new century, the trend of SLOW is getting
noticed by the tourism industry, and employed in tourism products as one of avenues to reduce emissions
(Dickinson et al., 2011; Lumsdon and McGrath, 2011). Low-emission travel initiatives have been implemented in
an active pace in Taiwan, such as low-carbon tourism and LOHAS (the Lifestyle of Health and Sustainability) slow
travel through shuttle or bus travel and electric, and biking modes. Researchers have discussed proenvironmental travel behavior and sustainable mobility of tourists and expected their findings helpful to
encourage tourists to be apt to relatively low-emission or greener transportation modes. However, little research
attention is put on how the built environment influences this kind of tourists’ sustainable choice through direct
function and interaction function with tourist’s perception of mode and tour characters.
In addition, there have been more than 110 certificated attractions of manufacture tourism in city all over
Taiwan, which were redeveloped through renovating abandoned or lowly-utilized industrial establishments to
accept tourism and recreational activities. The estimates of more than 10 million visits and more than 70 million
US dollars of revenues in 2013 show the popularity of the attractions; however, demonstrate the great amount of
GHG emission because visitors mainly drive cars to these destinations. Researchers and tourism industrial leaders
are calling for the implementation of low-carbon or sustainable travel methods, such as bus or shuttle routes to
encourage slow travelers. Therefore, relevant empirical studies focusing on how to encourage these tourists’
shifts to the sustainable way of travel are in an urgent need.
Aiming to understand how the built environment and individual attitudes towards shuttle tours directly and
interactively affect industrial tourists’ intention towards this kind of sustainable travel, this research surveyed 710
industrial tourists in 15 destinations. There were 3 main factors at the individual level, including environment
concern, slow travel mode, and tourism benefits constructed based on relevant literature (Dickinson et al., 2011;
Lumsdon and McGrath, 2011). In addition, the 5Ds concept was applied to develop the contextual factors based
on the notes of Cervero (2003), Cerevro and Kockelman (1997), and Ewing et al. (2009). The HLM analysis was

applied to analyze the direct effects and interaction effects of factors at individual and contextual levels. Several
factors, such as characters of modes and the experience in tours at the individual level and street designs and the
destination accessibility at the contextual level are found significantly and directly influence tourists’ intention
towards slow travel.
References
 Cervero, R. (2003). The built environment and travel: Evidence from the United States. EJTIR, 3(2), 119137.
 Dickinson, J. E., Lumsdon, L. M., and Robbins, D. (2011). Slow travel: Issues for tourism and climate
change. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 19(3), 281-30
 Dubois, H. and Ceron, J.-P. (2006). Tourism and climate change: Proposals for a research agenda. Journal
of Sustainable Tourism, 14(4), 399-415.
 Ewing, R., Greenwald, M.J., Zhang, M., Walters, J., Feldman, M., Cervero, R., and Thomas J. . (2009).
Measureing the impact of urban form and transit access on mixed use site trip generation rates-Portland
pilot study. Washington, DC: U.S. environment Protection Agency
 Lumsdon, L. M. and McGrath P. (2011). Developing a conceptual framework for slow travel: A grounded
theory approach. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 19(3), 265-279

Abstract Index #: 786
CAPACITY CONSTRAINED ACCESSIBILITY OF HIGH-SPEED RAIL
Abstract System ID#: 883
Individual Paper
SHEN, Yu [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] yushen@mit.edu, presenting author, primary author
ZHAO, Jinhua [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] jinhua@mit.edu
This paper proposes an enhanced measure of accessibility which explicitly takes into consideration circumstances
when the capacity of the transportation infrastructure, e.g. public transport, is limited. When capacity is constrained,
passengers may suffer longer waiting time, resulting in delay or cancellation of the trips. Without considering
capacity constraint, the standard measure tends to overestimate the accessibility contribution of the
infrastructure. To define and measure the accessibility with capacity constraints, we estimate the expected
waiting time and the probability of forgoing trips, based on the M/GB/1 type of queuing and discrete event
simulation, and formally incorporate the  impact of capacity constraints into the new measure: Capacity
Constrained Accessibility (CCA). The new measure provides a more realistic representation than standard
accessibility measure without considering capacity constraints, and CCA absorbs the standard measure as a
special case where capacity constraints are not binding.
In this study, we bridge the gap between the accessibility literature and the transit network assignment literature
to propose a new accessibility measure that incorporates the capacity constraints in the transit network. We
formalize the measure of CCA as the weighted average of accessibilities before and after the new infrastructure.
The weights, the probability of forgoing trips and the probability of persistence, are determined by threshold of
persistence and distribution of waiting time, simulated based on M/GB/1 queuing model.
To illustrate the differences between the CCA and standard measure, this paper estimates the accessibility
change in the Beijing-Tianjin corridor thanks to the Beijing-Tianjin Intercity High-Speed Railway (BTIHSR) opened
in 2008. We simulate and compare the CCA and standard measures in five queuing scenarios with different
assumptions of passenger arrival distributions, train service distributions, and system loads (i.e. arrival-service
ratios).
The results show that 1) under low system loads condition, i.e. unconstrained capacity, the CCA is compatible
with and absorbs standard measure as a special case; 2) when demand increases and approaches the capacity,
the CCA declines significantly: in two quasi-real scenarios, with average system loads of 70%~90% and peak hour
system loads of 110%, the standard measure overestimates the accessibility improvement by 14%~30% relative

to the CCA; and 3) under the scenario with very high demand and unreliable timetable, the CCA is almost reduced
to the level before BTIHSR.
Overall we conclude that the new CCA measure effectively incorporates the impact of capacity constraints. It is
also responsive to different arrival rules, service distributions, and system loads, and provides a more realistic
representation of the accessibility change than the standard measure.
The CCA is a generic method that can be applied in many transit system whenever capacity constraint is critical,
even though the queuing details have to be modified to reflect the specific system characteristics.
References
 Bhat, C., Handy, S.L., Kockelman, K., Mahmassani, H., Chen, Q., Westion, L. (2000) Urban accessibility
index: literature review. Center of Transportation Research, University of Texas at Austin, Springfield,
VA.
 Chaudhry, M.L., Templeton, J.G.C. (1983) A first course in bulk queues. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New
York.
 Leurent, F. (2011) transportation capacity constraints on the mass transit system: a systemic analysis.
European transportation Research Review 3, 11-21.
 Yin, M., Bertolini, L., Duan, J. (2014) The effects of the high-speed railway on urban development:
International experience and potential implications for China. Progress in Planning, pp. 1-52.

Abstract Index #: 787
WALKING IN city: INTERACTIONS BETWEEN NATURE AND ACCESS TO DESTINATIONS
Abstract System ID#: 886
Individual Paper
MONDSCHEIN, Andrew [University of Virginia] mondschein@virginia.edu, presenting author, primary author
JONES, Carla [University of Virginia] carlajones@virginia.edu
BEATLEY, Tim [University of Virginia] beatley@virginia.edu
As an alternative to driving with potential benefits to personal health, local economic development and the
environment, walking has garnered substantial interest from multiple planning subspecialties. Travel and built
environment research has increasingly shown that walking in city can be explained by factors such as
intersection density and access to destinations (Ewing & Cervero, 2010; Manaugh & El-Geneidy, 2011). These
factors, which are inherently “urban” qualities of a place, do not necessitate that natural features, such as street
trees, parks, water features, and vistas, be present for walking to occur. However, research from environment
psychology and public health finds that highly urban, nature-deprived environments exact a psychological toll on
individual wellbeing, and being in area with nature can have powerful mental and physical health benefits
(Barton & Pretty, 2010; Taylor, Kuo, & Sullivan, 2001; Thompson et al., 2012). Benefits ascribed to walking in
nature include reduced stress and hyperactivity, and improved self-esteem and prosocial behaviors. We ask,
broadly, whether the benefits observed in these studies are compatible with the highly urban, destinationoriented walking primarily addressed in the transportation literature. Can urban dwellers find access to both
destinations and nature, and ultimately how can planners create places that facilitate both types of access for
diverse urban populations?
In this study, we hypothesize that walkers will choose more natural places and paths in urban environments if the
option is available. We examine nature’s interaction with walkability through two primary sources of walking
behavior – a regional travel survey and the GPS-tracked walking paths of study participants in the Washington,
DC metropolitan area. Using an index measuring the degree of natural features along streets, we compare the
choice to walk both as a percentage of trips by all modes and in terms of route choice. Results confirm that
destination access and intersection density are significant correlates of walking. However, nature does play a
significant role when the choice is available, shaping where people choose to walk. The findings signify a critical
challenge for planners. For myriad reasons, we want people to walk more. However, because people will walk
with or without nature, but face potentially negative effects without it, planners are particularly responsible for

providing urban populations with places that effectively maximize both baseline walkability through destination
access and the enhanced individual benefits of nature.
References
 Barton, J., & Pretty, J. (2010). What is the best dose of nature and green exercise for improving mental
health? A multi-study analysis. environment science & technology, 44(10), 3947-3955.
 Ewing, R., & Cervero, R. (2010). Travel and the Built Environment. Journal of the American Planning
Association, 76(3), 265-294. doi: 10.1080/01944361003766766
 Manaugh, K., & El-Geneidy, A. (2011). Validating walkability indices: How do different households
respond to the walkability of their neighborhood? Transportation Research Part D: transportation and
Environment, 16(4), 309-315. doi: 10.1016/j.trd.2011.01.009
 Taylor, A. F., Kuo, F. E., & Sullivan, W. C. (2001). Coping with ADD The surprising connection to green play
settings. Environment and Behavior, 33(1), 54-77.
 Thompson, C. W., Roe, J., Aspinall, P., Mitchell, R., Clow, A., & Miller, D. (2012). More green space is
linked to less stress in deprived comminuty: Evidence from salivary cortisol patterns. Landscape and
urban_planning, 105(3), 221-229.

Abstract Index #: 788
UNDERSTANDING ELECTRIC VEHICLE ADOPTION
Abstract System ID#: 890
Individual Paper
COFFMAN, Makena [University of Hawaii at Manoa] makenaka@hawaii.edu
As part of the response to concerns over rising oil costs, energy security, and climate change, there is effort to
promote energy efficient and alternative fuel vehicles. In the U.S., there have been increases in Corporate
Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards as well as federal and state incentives toward hybrid electric vehicles
(HEVs) and, more recently, plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs) and battery electric vehicles (BEVs). PHEVs and
BEVs, the focus of this study, can collectively be referred to as electric vehicles (EVs).
EVs reduce or entirely negate gasoline or diesel use in vehicles through integration with the electric grid. PHEVs
can draw from a battery as well as liquid fuel. BEVs are solely powered through electricity. Both provide the
opportunity for power-sharing with the electric grid and can potentially ease the integration of sources of
intermittent renewable energy (Richardson, 2013). This is a potentially important technology to help reduce
greenhouse gas emissions, local air pollution, and vehicular noise (Brady and O’Mahony, 2011; Hawkins et al.,
2013). In recognition of these benefits, the U.S. in 2009 set a goal of putting one million electric vehicles (EVs) on
the road by 2015. This goal is far from being reached. As of the end of 2014, approximately 290,000 EVs have
been purchased in the U.S (EIA, 2014). Hawaii and California lead the U.S. in the highest shares of new BEV sales
in the country – though rates are still under 2%.
The barriers to EV adoption are largely due to their higher upfront cost, limited driving range and lack of charging
networks (Carley et al., 2013; Sierzchula et al., 2014). This study will build understanding of potential EV adoption
in Hawaii, where travel distances are relatively limited and there have been substantial efforts to develop a public
charging network. (Public parking lots in Hawaii with more than 100 spaces are required to equip at least one
stall with EV charging infrastructure.) This study will assess the “true cost” of owning an EV (based on best selling
models) in Hawaii, per county, in comparison to internal combustion engine (ICE) and HEV vehicles. Factors such
as regional electricity prices, typical commute distances, insurance and maintenance costs and purchase prices
will be used for model calibration. Additional considerations are made for whether a household has solar
photovoltaic (PV), as Hawaii also has some of the highest rates of PV penetration in the U.S. The model will focus
on the impact of federal financial incentives to better understand the role of policy in influencing total ownership
costs (and implicitly EV adoption) – particularly in the decision to purchase or lease an EV. This may be impactful
because federal tax credits are not necessarily passed on to the consumer in whole if the vehicle is leased from

the dealership. Moreover, leasing may have substantial  impact to how consumers use and maintain batteries
over, thus affecting potential vehicle-to-grid opportunities.
References
 Richardson, D., 2013. Electric vehicles and the electric grid: A review of modeling approaches,  impact,
and renewable energy integration. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 19, 247-254.
 Brady, J., O’Mahony, M., 2011. Travel to Work in Dublin: The Potential  impact of Electric Vehicles on
Climate Change and Urban Air Quality. Transportation Research Part D 16, 188-193.
 Hawkins, T.R., Singh, B., Majeau-Bettez, G., Stromman, A.H., 2013. Comparative environment Lifecycle
Assessment of Conventional and Electric Vehicles. Journal of Industrial Ecology 17, 53-64.
 Carley, S., Krause, R., Lane, B., Graham, J. 2013. Intent to Purchase a Plug-In Electric Vehicle: A Survey of
Early Impressions in Large US city. Transportation Research Part D 18, 39-45.
 Sierzchula, W., Bakker, S., Maat, K., Wee, B., 2014. The Influence of Financial Incentives and other SocioEconomic Factors on Electric Vehicle Adoption. Energy Policy 68, 183-194.

Abstract Index #: 789
DEMONSTRATING THE BENEFITS OF GREEN STREETS FOR ACTIVE AGING
Abstract System ID#: 893
Individual Paper
DILL, Jennifer [Portland State University] jdill@pdx.edu, presenting author, primary author
NEAL, Margaret [Portland State University] nealm@pdx.edu
ADKINS, Arlie [University of Arizona] arlieadkins@email.arizona.edu
LUHR, Gretchen [Portland State University] gluhr@pdx.edu
Background
The aim of this project was to help demonstrate how “green streets” contribute to the well-being of a
community, including the physical and mental health of older and younger adults. Green streets are streets that
incorporate natural, landscape-based features that reduce stormwater runoff and accommodate multiple travel
modes, particularly walking and bicycling. Green streets are relatively new in practice and there is very little
published research directly evaluating their multiple potential benefits, particularly secondary benefits (e.g. travel
behavior and social interactions). The primary objective of this paper isto assess the relationship between green
streets and physical activity, social interaction, and neighborhood social capital. The hypothesis is that the green
street features may make a neighborhood better for walking and encourage more outdoor activity. This, in turn,
may increase social interaction and capital. All of this could positively affect physical and mental health. We were
particularly interested in examining potential differences between older (65+) and younger adults.
Methodology
The study included two treatment and two control area within the Lents Neighborhood in Portland, Oregon. The
neighborhood is suburban in character, consisting primarily of modest, single-family detached homes, with some
small apartment buildings. We conducted walkability audits of the four area, using 12 older adult volunteers
who audited nearly 400 street blocks. We conducted a mail-out/mail-back survey to all residences in the four
areas, with a response rate of 26% (n=572 households and 748 individual adult surveys). The survey respondents
were predominantly homeowners. Just over half were women and over 70% were white. A sizeable share (16%
to 27%, depending upon the area) were 65 years old or over.
Key findings
Residents in the one of the two green street area did report walking more often than the other area. To help
account for the influence of other factors, we estimated a linear regression model, with the total number of
times per month the respondent walked from home as the dependent variable. One of the green street area
was still a significant factor in predicting walking frequency, even after controlling for demographics (renter, age,
driver’s license, physical limitations), attitudes towards walking, and self-reported perception of places within

walking distance from home. There were also some significant differences in self-reported increases in walking or
perceptions of the neighborhood for walking since the green street features were installed.
We did find that residents in the two green streets area waved, said hello, and stopped and talked with their
neighbors more frequently than residents in the two control area. There were not significant differences in other
types of interactions, such as going to a neighbor’s house to socialize or asking a neighbor for help. In addition,
37% and 40% of the residents in the green streets area said that their neighborhood was now a better place to
live, which was significantly more than in the control area.
When we compared older adults (65+) to younger adults, there were some differences. Older adults were less
likely to say that the green streets make walking in their neighborhood more pleasant and more likely to say that
the green streets make parking on the street more difficult and driving more difficult.
References
 Nagel, C. L., Carlson, N. E., Bosworth, M., & Michael, Y. (2008). The relation between neighborhood built
environment and walking activity among older adults. American Journal of Epidemiology, 168, 461-468.
 Forsyth, A., Hearst, M., Oakes, J. M., & Schmitz, K. H. (2008). Design and destinations: Factors
influencing walking and total physical activity. Urban Studies, 45, 1973-1996.
 Lund, H. (2003). Testing the claims of New Urbanism: Local access, pedestrian travel, and neighboring
behaviors. Journal of the American Planning Association, 60(4), pp. 414-429.
 McNeill, L. H., Kreuter, M. W., Subramanian, S. V. (2006). Social environment and physical activity: A
review of concepts and evidence. Social Science & Medicine, 63, 1011-1022

Abstract Index #: 790
URBAN AMERICA'S RESPONSE TO THE EMERGENCE OF ELECTRIC VEHICLES: EVIDENCE FROM NEW YORK CITY
Abstract System ID#: 899
Individual Paper
BEHESHTIAN, Arash [Cornell University] ab2348@cornell.edu
Despite escalating market share of electric vehicles (EVs), their large-scale adoption faces such structural
challenges as a shortage of charging infrastructures and low range of electric batteries. An inadequate number of
charging stations in urban America negatively  impact consumers’ willingness to pay for EVs and may impede
wider adoption. In order to address potential market failures, governments have employed a number of policy.
The State of New York, for instance, in cooperation with the National environment Policy Act (NEPA) and the
New York State Energy Research and Development Authority (NYSERDA) has launched ‘NY Charge’, a statewide
initiative to provide a network of up to 3,000 charging stations and electrified parking spaces (EPS). The State’s
goal to increase the number of on-road EVs to 40,000 in 2018 and a million by 2025, although ambitious,
indicates New York’s long-term plan for EVs adoption. This goal cannot be reached without an adequate number
of charging infrastructures.
Bracketing many uncertainties about a number of factors influencing adoption of EVs, relatively little is known
about the importance of the urban built environment or the role of mixed-use properties in shaping demand for
EVs. Mixed-use properties, as promoted by the State and sponsored by a couple of private firms, are dual or
multi-functional lands which aside the primary function, provide EVs’ charging facilities (e.g. ‘park and charge’
infrastructures located in shopping centers or EPSs). However, availability of charging infrastructures in
Manhattan is not the only physical attribute of the City that may impact EVs market share. The 400% decline in
the number of Manhattan’s gas stations over the last decade could also be another factor affecting the number
and composition of on-road vehicles, a classification that has traditionally been dominated by internal
combustion engine vehicles (ICEVs).
Accordingly, a question of interest for planners concerns the effects of these two phenomena—mixed-use
properties and number of gas stations—on EVs adoption. This paper analyzes these effects and reports findings

of simulation experiments with policy scenarios in which successful transition to the State’s long-term goal for
non-fossil-based fuel modes of transportation is catalyzed.
We proceed by conducting a survey of empirical studies on private vehicle daily-commuters which travel to or
from one of the Manhattan’s traffic analysis zones (TAZs) and categorize variables influencing travelers’ choice
into five classes of i)  land_use attributes, ii) commuter’s attributes, iii) trip attributes, iv) vehicle attributes, and v)
fueling/charging station attributes. The marginal contribution of urban form to travelers’ choice is then estimated
through a mixed multinomial logit model (MMNL). Using estimated elasticities, a number of scenarios are
developed to analyze i) the role of mixed-use land policy that increases availability of charging facilities to EVs
and ii) the influence of the shrinking number of Manhattan’s gas stations in EVs adoption.
EPSs and electrified charging stations are both being heavily supported, financially and politically, by New York
City and New York State and will receive more of such support in future, as announced by the State. Yet, for
successful transition to alternative fuel-based transportation, the effects of urban form on EV adoption must be
investigated and the significance of  land_use policy on modal share of non-fossil fuel vehicles must be further
investigated.
References
 Kitamura, Ryuichi, Patricia L. Mokhtarian, and Laura Laidet. "A micro-analysis of  land_use and travel in
five neighborhood in the San Francisco Bay Area."Transportation 24.2 (1997): 125-158.
 Bento, Antonio M., et al. "The effects of urban spatial structure on travel demand in the United States."
Review of Economics and Statistics 87.3 (2005): 466-478.
 Cao, Xinyu, Patricia L. Mokhtarian, and Susan L. Handy. "Neighborhood design and vehicle type choice:
Evidence from Northern California." Transportation Research Part D: transportation and Environment 11.2
(2006): 133-145.
 Cervero, Robert. "Built environments and mode choice: toward a normative framework." Transportation
Research Part D: transportation and Environment 7.4 (2002): 265-284.

Abstract Index #: 791
THE DEMAND FOR RELIABLE TRANSIT SERVICE: NEW EVIDENCE USING STOP LEVEL DATA FROM THE LOS
ANGELES METRO BUS SYSTEM
Abstract System ID#: 902
Individual Paper
CHAKRABARTI, Sandip [University of Southern California] sandipch@usc.edu
The U.S. public transit industry has experienced substantial growth in funding support over the past several
decades. Local governments and public transit agencies have collectively worked towards coordinating innovative
 land_use policy with unprecedented transit service improvements for promoting transit use. Unfortunately,
however, ridership growth has not kept pace with capital investments and rising operating costs. Transit’s share
in the U.S. travel market continues to be relatively small and productivity of public transit system across the
nation continues to decline.
Experts argue that key to increasing transit’s market share is to invest in those aspects of service that travelers
value most (e.g. Giuliano, 2011). In this paper, I explore whether service reliability, a critical dimension of service
quality/performance that has received relatively low empirical attention in the past, can play a role in increasing
the demand for transit travel.
Survey data shows that reliability is highly valued by transit passengers (e.g. Iseki and Taylor, 2010), because
unreliability results in unpredictable wait times, missed transfer connections, and penalties associated with
arriving at the destination earlier or later than desired. Consequently, transit planners have devoted significant
effort towards measuring unreliability (e.g. Chen et al., 2009), exploring factors that cause unreliability (e.g.
Yetiskul and Senbil, 2012), and developing strategies to increase reliability (e.g. Xuan et al., 2011). However, we

still know very little about how service reliability influences demand – i.e. whether reliability can be used as a tool
to increase patronage. My research aims at providing new information to transit managers using new data and
methods, and consequently facilitating formulation of future policy that can potentially rejuvenate the U.S.
public transit industry.
My study specifically explores the role service reliability plays in determining bus transit ridership. Using time
point stop level service supply, demand, and performance data from the Los Angeles Metro bus system, I
investigate whether reliability of a [directional] line serving a stop influences the number of passengers boarding
the line at that stop, controlling for various other established factors affecting demand. This cross-sectional
analysis of the variation in line boardings across about 1300 sample [time point] bus stops served by about 300
directional bus lines over a strategically-selected six-month study period (December 2011 - May 2012) uses a
historical archive of real-time geo-referenced vehicle location data, and focuses on five different time periods,
peaks and off-peaks, of a typical weekday. By evaluating three different measures that capture multiple
dimensions of bus service reliability, and by estimating a series of regression models, I find systematic evidence
that higher average service punctuality (or schedule adherence), consistency in the level of punctuality over time,
and lower variation in schedule deviation over time are associated with greater ridership, all else equal,
particularly during the AM and PM peaks. This study also provides first empirical evidence that the effect of
reliability on peak-period ridership is moderated by headway; demand for reliability seems to be higher for lines
with relatively longer headways (highest in the 20-30 minute headway range).
The findings indicate that service reliability influences transit mode choice and/or line/route selection, and
suggest that system-wide ridership gains can be expected from reliability improvements in the presence of latent
demand for transit travel. From an urban_planning perspective, this study provides more proof that good service
quality can effectively compliment transformations in the urban fabric brought about by coordinated  land_use –
transit plans to promote transit use.
References
 Chen, X., Yu, L., Zhang, Y., & Guo, J. (2009). Analyzing urban bus service reliability at the stop, route, and
network levels. Transportation Research Part A, 43, pp. 722–734.
 Giuliano, G. (2011) “Transportation policy: Public transit, settlement patterns and equity in the US,”
chapter 28 in N. Brooks, K. Donaghy and G. Knaap, eds., Oxford University Press Handbook of Urban
Economics and Planning. New York: Oxford University Press.
 Iseki, H., & Taylor, B. D. (2010). Style versus Service? An Analysis of User Perceptions of Transit Stops and
Stations. Journal of Public Transportation, 13(3), 23-48.
 Xuan, Y., Argote, J., & Daganzo, C. F. (2011). Dynamic bus holding strategies for schedule reliability:
Optimal linear control and performance analysis. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological,
45(10), 1831-1845.
 Yetiskul, E., & Senbil, M. (2012). Public bus transit travel-time variability in Ankara (Turkey). Transport
Policy, 23, 50-59.

Abstract Index #: 792
USING MICRO-LEVEL DATA TO EVALUATE WALKABILITY AROUND BUS RAPID TRANSIT STATIONS: A CASE
STUDY OF XIAMEN, CHINA
Abstract System ID#: 905
Individual Paper
XU, Junping [Graduated PhD of Texas A & M University & Xiamen High-Level Overseas Consultant]
jennyxuhappy@gmail.com, presenting author, primary author
JOH, Kenneth [Texas A & M University] kjoh@tamu.edu
China has experienced rapid car-oriented suburbanization in the pastdecade and is facing emerging challenges
such as congestion, air pollution and health threats. Transit Oriented Development (TOD), designed to encourage
the use of public transit by creatinga pedestrian-friendly urban environment, has been used as a tool to decrease

car-dependence in North American city for decades (Boschmann and Brady, 2013; Cervero et al., 2004).
Recently, Chinese city have started to adopt TOD strategies. Since a walkable environment is one of the aims of
TOD, it is critical to evaluate and improve the walkability of station area. Although much research has been
conducted in the walkability field, few existing studies have examined the pedestrian environment around transit
stations at a micro-level. This research will fill this knowledge gap and provide lessons for transportation and land
use planning using an international case study.
This research will use various walkability measures to investigate the built environment around stations of the
Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) No.1 Line in Xiamen, China. Before 2007, Xiamen had no rapid transit system and the BRT
No.1 line was the first rapid line to accommodate a large number of passengers from the suburb to downtown.
The total length of the No.1 line is 32.6km with 22 stations, including many important nodes, such as the highspeed railway station, Zhongshan commercial district, the international airport and piers.
This study defines half mile buffer centered on each station as the spatial unit of analysis. Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) and field audits will be employed to measure the built environment characteristics for each spatial
unit of analysis. Built environment variables will include residential density,  land_use mix, and infrastructure (e.g.
completeness of sidewalks, street lights coverage density, trees coverage density, transit station parking, street
density, and intersection density). GIS data will be obtained from the Xiamen Planning Bureau. Microdrones
MD4-1000 type four rotor unmanned aerial vehicle (uav) will be employed for micro-level GIS data collection.
Field audits would also be conducted for verifying and collecting additional data.
The results of this analysis would reveal detailed characteristics of the walkability of the built environment
around the BRT No.1 line stations. These results would help assess the quality of the pedestrian environment and
the type of infrastructure that needs to be added or improved for each station area. The findings would not only
provide empirical support for improving TODs in Xiamen, but offer a lesson to North American planners on how
areas around transit stations could be retrofitted to improve the pedestrian environment.
References
 Boschmann and Brady. (2013). The analysis of transit-oriented development (TOD) in Washington, D.C.
and Baltimore metropolitan area. transportation Policy, 32, 172-179.
 Cervero, R., et al. (2004). Transit-oriented development in the United States:experiences, challenges,
and prospects. Transportation Research Board, 61–82.

Abstract Index #: 793
AN ANALYSIS OF AGGLOMERATION EFFECTS IN THE PROXIMITY OF METRORAIL STATIONS IN THE
WASHINGTON, D.C. METROPOLITAN AREA
Abstract System ID#: 911
Individual Paper
GREENE, Cole [University of Maryland at College Park] cmgreene911@gmail.com, presenting author
ISEKI, Hiroyuki [University of Maryland at College Park] hiseki@umd.edu, primary author
JONES, Robert [University of Maryland at College Park] rpjones@umd.edu
Firm location decisions are influenced by a multitude of factors, ranging firm type (market based versus resource
based) to land costs to labor force availability. These decisions have a major impact on a region’s economic
development landscape as well as the overall accessibility of the region. Agglomeration economies can arise
more easily in area with high firm concentrations (Cohen and Paul, 2005, Hoover and Giarratani, 1971). A case
study done by Mejia-Dorantes, Paez and Vassallo in 2011 hypothesized that transit stations increase the
desirability of the surrounding area for firms, and thus facilitate growth of agglomeration economies. Their study
explored the patterns of firm distribution for different industry sectors around several metro stations that began
operation in 2003 in Alcorcan, Spain; Alcorcan is southwest of Madrid City and connected to Madrid’s CBD by
metro. This study used a multinomial logit model (MNL) to predict the likelihood of a given site being occupied by
a firm in a specific activity in 2007 (i.e. retail firm versus manufacturing firm) by variables that measure distance

from each location to the closest location of public transit infrastructure/service, highway infrastructure, and the
center of downtown, as well as street density and population density. The model also included variables of
“sector-specific occupancy ratios” in which the number of establishments of type i (within a specified radius) was
divided by the total number of sites in that area in 1998. These variables account for the assumption that the
types of other firms in the area influence firm location. Their results indicated that industry-specific spatial
clusters arose in relation to an increase in transit accessibility because of the opening of the metro stations.
Following the study by Mejia-Dorantes, Paez and Vassallo, we examine whether significant industry-specific
spatial clusters have developed in relation to the presence of Washington Metro Area Transit Authority (WMATA)
stations with a special focus on the nine stations that opened between 1999 and 2004. We use data from the
National Employment Time Series (NETS), which provides geo-referenced information on individual firms such as
firm name, birth year, and North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code. Data from five years prior
to the first opening to five years after the last opening (1994-2009) are used to establish baseline trends and
capture any slow-developing trends. Processing the data with a Geographic Information System (GIS) allows for
the analysis of industry-specific firm densities (using kernel density statistics). Additionally, regression analysis is
used to examine the effects of transit station accessibility, controlling for other factors, such as population
density, highway accessibility, demographics of residents, and distance to downtown Washington, D.C..
If the results from the 2011 Mejia-Dorantes, Paez and Vassallo article hold true for the Washington, D.C. metro
area, we would expect to see increased firm density for market oriented industry sectors close to the metro
stations over the time span. The firm location pattern changes are expected to be a result of the changes in
accessibility associated WMATA station openings in addition to other factors incorporated in this paper’s models,
such as agglomeration economies and other neighborhood characteristics. The findings of this paper will
contribute to the understanding of which industry sectors transit-oriented firm location occurs in and, to what
extent transit stations impact this growth. Subsequently, planning professionals in real estate development,
urban_planning and transportation planning will be able to make more efficient decisions about Transit-OrientedDevelopment (TOD).
References
 Cohen, J.P., Paul, C.J.M., 2005. “Agglomeration economies and industry location decisions: the  impact
of spatial and industrial spillovers”. Regional Science and Urban Economics 35 (3): 215-237.
 Hoover, E.M., Giarratani, F., 1971. “An introduction to Regional Economics”. McGraw-Hill, New York.
 Mejia-Dorantes, L., A. Paez, and J.M. Vassallo. 2012. "Transportation infrastructure  impact on firm
location: the effect of a new metro line in the suburbs of Madrid". Journal of transportation Geography. 22:
236-250
 Gustavo Garcia Manzato, Theo A. Arentze, Harry J. P. Timmermans, and Dick Ettema, “Evaluating Effects
of Location Attributes on Office Firm Start-up”, presented as the 94th Transportation Research Board
Annual Meeting, Washington D.C., January, 2015.

Abstract Index #: 794
OVERTURNING PLANNING MECHANISMS THAT CONTRIBUTE TO SPRAWL: CALIFORNIA'S SWITCH FROM LEVEL
OF SERVICE TO VEHICLE MILES TRAVELED IN TRANSPORTATION IMPACT ANALYSIS
Abstract System ID#: 913
Poster
FANG, Kevin [University of California, Davis] kfang@ucdavis.edu
It has been argued that common  land_use controls, such as Euclidean zoning, setbacks, and minimum parking
requirements have contributed to sprawl (Pendall, 1999). Another potential contributor to sprawl in the planning
process is the use of Level of Service (LOS) to measure roadway performance. When the traffic  impact of
development projects are analyzed, they are traditionally measured in terms of the LOS  impact to surrounding
roads. If a project loads too many vehicles onto nearby roads such that those roads exceed LOS standards, two
things usually occur. Either capacity is expanded (e.g. road widening, new roads), or the size of projects is

reduced. Both actions have the impact of reducing density, consuming more land, and pushing development
outward -- in other words, sprawl. Lower densities and outlying development are also correlated with more
driving and less use of alternative modes (Ewing and Cervero, 2010).
LOS-based transportation impact analysis can also characterize alternative transportation investments such as
road diets or installation of transit-only lanes as negative  impact rather than enhancements due to their effect
on automobile capacity. A prominent example of this is the San Francisco Bicycle Plan which was stalled for four
years due to a successful LOS-based challenge (Henderson, 2011).
In response to these issues, California passed Senate Bill 743 in 2013 which prohibited the use of LOS in
transportation impact analysis under the California environment Quality Act. The California Office of Planning
and Research (OPR) has proposed LOS be replaced with VMT (Vehicle Miles Traveled). This research investigates
how traffic impact analysis can be performed under a VMT-based analysis process. To perform VMT-based traffic
impact analysis, we need to answer two central questions: (1) How do we estimate the VMT of proposed
projects? (2) How do we judge VMT?
The first question is relatively easy to answer. Existing methods allow us to estimate project-level VMT. The
second question however is more difficult. Up until now, VMT has simply been a statistic. Now that VMT is an
evaluation metric, we now need to place value judgments on VMT. How much VMT is so high that it constitutes a
significant impact on the environment?
OPR has proposed that projects in California be evaluated relative to the VMT rates of existing development of
similar  land_uses within the same region. However, this research has found that there are technical and feasibility
issues that still need to be worked out with this proposal. We cannot readily calculate this region-specific, land_use specific existing VMT figure from existing information. There are ways to theoretically determine this missing
information, but this may be difficult and expensive. These challenges will need to be solved before VMT can
become a usable impact analysis metric that can meet the goals of SB 743 to reduce sprawl and encourage
transit-oriented development.
References
 Pendall, R. (1999). Do land-use controls cause sprawl? Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design,
26(4), 555-571.
 Ewing, R., & Cervero, R. (2010). Travel and the built environment: a meta-analysis. Journal of the
American planning association, 76(3), 265-294.
 Henderson, J. (2011). Level of service: the politics of reconfiguring urban streets in San Francisco, CA.
Journal of transportation Geography, 19(6), 1138-1144.

Abstract Index #: 795
EXAMINING UNMET DEMAND FOR MOBILITY: TRAVEL PURPOSE DIVERSITY AMONG LOWER WEALTH
HOUSEHOLDS IN BOGOTA, COLOMBIA
Abstract System ID#: 917
Individual Paper
COMBS, Tabitha [Lincoln University] tabitha.combs@lincoln.ac.nz
In the world’s developing city, rapid increases in the use of private cars is associated with a number of negative
consequences, including deteriorating air quality, dangerous traffic conditions, and decreased economic
productivity. The burden of these consequences is borne disproportionately by the poor. Paradoxically, many
approaches to reining in rising car use—such as congestion pricing and driving restrictions—undercut the
mobility of lower wealth households. As an alternative, a growing number of city are investing heavily in mass
transit system as a means to both limit the negative  impact of increased car use and improve mobility across all
socioeconomic strata. However, there is little evidence to date regarding whether such investments can provide
an acceptable alternative to driving, particularly in the context of rapidly motorizing developing city.

Understanding the mobility  impact of transit interventions is hampered by a lack of valid, readily available
indicators of unmet travel needs. The primary objective of this paper is to introduce a potential metric—travel
purpose diversity—to represent the degree to which an individual’s or household’s travel needs are unmet. This
metric is based on theoretical frameworks that suggest the greater variety of activities individuals engage in
outside the home, the less likely they are to experience unmet travel needs and the better their overall quality of
life (Lucas 2012). In the context of a developing city, with low but rising levels of car ownership, transit-based
interventions that improve mobility will, theoretically, enable people with access to the system to fulfil a greater
diversity of travel purposes (and engage in a greater variety of activities) than those without access to the
system, all else equal. I address this objective in the context of Bogotá, Colombia.
A secondary objective is to examine the  impact of Bogotá’s TransMilenio BRT system on mobility patterns—
including travel purpose diversity—of the city’s lower wealth households. TransMilenio was introduced in 2000
and has been widely praised for positive  impact on transit ridership, congestion, safety, and air quality. Despite
overcrowding, delayed expansions, and political controversies, TransMilenio is considered the gold standard for
low-cost sustainable urban transportation around the world. However, prior research has found significantly higher
rates of car ownership among lower wealth households with access to the BRT system, relative to pre-BRT
conditions (Combs & Rodríguez 2014). Whether this rise in car ownership is signalling a response to a loss of
mobility brought about by TransMilenio is unclear. If it is, it calls into question the system’s long run viability as a
just, sustainable transportation system.
Methods: I used a difference-in-differences research design to examine changes in total tours completed, tours
completed by mode, and travel purpose diversity at the household level. I used count regression models to
estimate total tours and tours by mode. Travel purpose diversity was modeled via generalized ordered logistic
regression. Travel data come from city-wide household mobility surveys conducted approximately five years
before and after TransMilenio’s introduction.
Findings: Travel purpose diversity increases with car ownership, bicycle ownership, wealth, and household size,
which suggests that, in the context of Bogotá, travel purpose diversity is greater in households with greater
demand for travel. This finding lends support to the metric’s validity as a measure of mobility.
There were no consistent, significant relationships between BRT access and any of the travel outcomes. Thus,
even though members of lower wealth households make up the majority of TransMilenio’s ridership, the system
appears to have had little measureable impact on the mobility of lower wealth households. However, additional
research is needed before we can safely draw conclusions about how well any of the metrics examined here
reflect changes in mobility due to transit investment, particularly in low resource, mobility-constrained settings.
References
 Bocarejo, JP & Oviedo, DR. 2012. transportation accessibility and social inequities: a tool for identification of
mobility needs and evaluation of transportation investments. Journal of transportation Geography. 24, 142–154.
 Combs, TS & Rodríguez, DA, 2014. Joint  impact of Bus Rapid Transit and urban form on vehicle
ownership: New evidence from a quasi-longitudinal analysis in Bogotá, Colombia. Transportation
Research Part A Policy & Practice. 69, 272-295.
 Krizek, KJ, 2003. Neighborhood services, trip purpose, and tour-based travel. Transportation. 30, 387410.
 Lucas, K, 2012. transportation and social exclusion: Where are we now? transportation Policy. 20, 105-113
 Zegras, P, 2010. The built environment and motor vehicle ownership and use: Evidence from Santiago de
Chile. Urban Studies. 47, 1793-1817.

Abstract Index #: 796
HOW DID HOUSEHOLDS ECONOMIZE ON TRAVEL DURING PERIODS OF HIGH GASOLINE PRICES?
Abstract System ID#: 930
Individual Paper

LEE, Yongsung [Georgia Institute of Technology] yongsung.lee@gatech.edu, presenting author, primary author
GUHATHAKURTA, Subhrajit [Georgia Institute of Technology] subhro@gatech.edu
There have been extensive efforts to understand the interaction between land-use characteristics and household
travel behaviors. Transportation scholars have attempted to measure the effects of land-use-oriented
approaches on changes in travel behaviors. In this context, another critical dimension is price-oriented policy
such as higher gas taxes, mileage taxes, and emission charges. Given that the national goal of greenhouse gas
reduction cannot be achieved by technical or pricing schemes alone, transportation planners need to understand
additive or considering land-use together with other policy.
While pure experimental designs related to both  land_use measures and price policy are very expensive, recent
fluctuations in gas prices can be used as a natural experiment. In other words, people may have responded to
unexpected gas price changes around 2009 in similar ways to how they would behave under governmental
pricing policy.
Our preliminary research has found that Atlanta residents increased their trip chaining in response to high gas
prices in 2009, which was one way of economizing household travel. Our next step is to compare findings from
the Atlanta metro area to other regions’ household travel behaviors in order to understand how regions with
more alternative travel options have been different from regions with fewer options, such as Atlanta. This
comparative research is expected to reveal how regional land-use characteristics can make a difference under
increased driving cost conditions in an effort to reduce greenhouse gas emission.
The San Francisco metro is selected as an example of less-sprawled metros with more alternative travel modes.
San Francisco had high scores among the largest US metros in terms of compact development patterns in 2000
and 2010, which were calculated by Ewing and his colleagues. Also, San Francisco had similar population size to
Atlanta in 2000, though Atlanta grew more than San Francisco in the 2000s. The preliminary analysis revealed
that San Francisco households made more transit trips in response to high gas prices, which could not be found in
Atlanta around 2009.
The final results would include different adjusting travel behaviors by the households in San Francisco and
Atlanta; (1) shift of less to more efficient household vehicles, (2) change in mode choice, (3) reduction in out-ofhome activities, (4) reorganization of household trips while having the same out-of-home activity levels, e.g.
increase in trip chaining, and (5) change in destination choice, e.g. neighborhood groceries closer to homes
versus regional shopping malls farther from homes.
References
 Lee, B., & Lee, Y. (2013). Complementary Pricing and  land_use policy: Does It Lead to Higher Transit
Use? Journal of the American Planning Association, 79(4), 314-328.
 Krizek, K. J. (2003). Neighborhood services, trip purpose, and tour-based travel. Transportation, 30(4),
387-410.
 Hamidi, S., & Ewing, R. (2014). A longitudinal study of changes in urban sprawl between 2000 and 2010
in the United States. Landscape and urban_planning, 128, 72-82.

Abstract Index #: 797
RESIDENTS' PREFERENCE TOWARDS WIDE STREET AND ON-STREET PARKING IN AMERICAN SUBURBIA
Abstract System ID#: 947
Individual Paper
KUAI, Yiwen [New York University] xavierk@nyu.edu, presenting author, primary author
GUO, Zhan [New York University] zg11@nyu.edu

Local governments set street minimum width and cross-section design for local neighborhood streets. Because
local streets typically require no more than two traffic lanes, minimum width of 26 feet or wider automatically
produces at least one parking lane on the street, making this requirement a de facto parking policy. One rationale
behind the mandate is technical necessity for safety concerns such as traffic and emergency vehicle access. The
other one is market amenity to provide extra parking for residents and visitors. There is, however, no consistent
empirical evidence to justify either rationale. Our previous research shows that the argument for ensuring traffic
safety by adopting minimum street width does not stand. Such an argument is not supported by fire codes, most
of which do not require a clearance beyond 20 feet. Many local governments do allow narrower streets in private
communities - which the developers, instead of the local governments, are responsible for services and
infrastructures. If the rationale behind the minimum street width is to correct market failure and eliminate
negative externalities of narrow streets, it is unclear whether current street standards are the most efficient
policy response. Residents’ preference towards residential on-street parking is an unstudied piece in the debate
of street width and street parking mandate. It is critical to understand whether wide neighborhood street is an
efficient market outcome driven by consumer demand.
This pilot study is a first attempt to understand consumers’ preference on wide street in American suburbia and
whether it justifies local government’s action to impose minimum street width. We utilize an online stated-choice
survey in order to estimate residents’ willingness-to-pay and connect with the real price associated with
constructing and maintaining a street and its on-street parking space. This study surveyed a stratified random
sample of 9,169 residents living in suburban single-family homes from 21 city in 12 metropolitan area. The
selection of targeted survey area encompasses two key parameters: distinct street standards practices and a
variation of street widths. We have chosen city with both private and public comminuty in order to witness
street width variations and discrete government policy on regulating local street width. We received 298
surveys with 216 included in the final analysis.
The result shows a significant mismatch between resident’s willingness-to-pay and the actual cost of constructing
and maintaining one lane of on-street parking in front of the residence. On average, resident’s willingness-to-pay
is far less than the actual cost. Depending on the interest rate for capital and maintenance loans, we estimate
only 8% to 14% of the residents surveyed are willing and able to pay up to the actual cost associated with one
parking lane in front their residences. Residents living on the narrowest streets (less or equal to 20 feet) and the
widest streets (greater or equal to 30 feet) have the lowest values in their willingness-to-pay. The result suggests
that residents living on relatively narrow streets are less likely to be willing to pay for wide streets and are more
satisfied with their current street width. Such a result also indicates that for those currently choose to live on
narrow streets, free market may work better than a government-intervened market. Street standards adopted by
the local governments are over-supplying street width for residents who currently live on excessively wide
streets. Consumer demand of wide street and on-street parking does not widely exist. Well-established and
widely institutionalized street standards appears to be the sole force in producing excessively wide local streets.
References
 Ben-Joseph, Eran. 2003. Subdivision Regulations: Practices & Attitudes: A Survey of Public Officials and
Developers in the Nation’s Fastest Growing Single Family Housing Markets.
http://www.lincolninst.edu/pubs/846_Subdivision-Regulations--Practices---Attitudes.
 Guo, Zhan, and Luis Schloeter. 2013. “Street Standards as Parking Policy Rethinking the Provision of
Residential Street Parking in American Suburbs.” Journal of Planning Education and Research 33 (4):
456–70. doi:10.1177/0739456X13504299.
 Shoup, Donald C. 2005. The High Cost of Free Parking. Planners Press, American Planning Association.
 Southworth, Michael, and Eran Ben-Joseph. 1995. “Street Standards and the Shaping of Suburbia.”
Journal of the American Planning Association 61 (1): 65–81. doi:10.1080/01944369508975620.
 Willson, Richard W. 1995. “Suburban Parking Requirements: A Tacit Policy for Automobile Use and
Sprawl.” Journal of the American Planning Association 61 (1): 29–42. doi:10.1080/01944369508975617.

Abstract Index #: 798
AN ACTIVITY-BASED APPROACH TO MEASURING THE EFFECT OF  land_use MIXING ON PEDESTRIAN TRAVEL
Abstract System ID#: 952
Individual Paper
GEHRKE, Steven [Portland State University] sgehrke@pdx.edu, presenting author, primary author
CLIFTON, Kelly [Portland State University] kclifton@pdx.edu
Urban policy have emphasized the importance of mixing  land_uses in a neighborhood as an intervention
beholding of lasting planning and public health benefits. Transportation planning research has identified the
potential of efficiency gains achieved by increasing  land_use mix and the subsequent shortening of trip lengths;
whereas, public health research has accredited increased  land_use mixing as an effective policy for facilitating
greater physical activity. However, despite the transportation,  land_use, and health benefits of improved  land_use
mixing and the extent of topical attention given by researchers, no consensus has been reached regarding the
magnitude of its effect on active travel behavior. Absence of agreement may largely be attributed to theoretical
and methodological failings persistent in past attempts to measure the  land_use mix construct. This research
identifies these limitations and provides direction on the choice of  land_use mix measure and spatial scale at
which to analyze the construct’s relationship with pedestrian travel. Specifically, this study examines the link
between walking and  land_use mix by (1) quantifying the functional complementarity, composition, and spatial
configuration of different  land_use types and (2) modeling the impact of  land_use mixing when operationalized at
varying fixed and sliding spatial scales.
A theoretically sound measure of  land_use mix depicts the functional complementarity of  land_use types within a
neighborhood by matching the  land_uses specified in a composition measure to activities with an established
synergy. This study measures functional complementarity rather than  land_use heterogeneity by relating the
activities conducted on a tour to the  land_use types specified in a mix measure. Additionally, rather than
supposing an equal distribution of heterogeneous  land_use types reflects an ideal level of mix, this study explores
the measurement of composition based on the activity generated by a  land_use instead of its spatial footprint.
Apart from  land_use composition, this study examines the paired concept of spatial configuration since the
increased proximity of  land_uses associated with a fragmented spatial pattern has a hypothesized link to
increased pedestrian trip generation.
Adoption of a single operationalization strategy for measuring the relationship between  land_use mix and travel
has become commonplace because of data availability and convenience, but has limited theoretical support.
Pedestrians are unlikely to consider arbitrary administrative boundaries when deciding if or how to reach an
activity location. Accordingly, this study compares these fixed as well as sliding scale depictions of  land_use
composition and configuration to better inform past conceptualizations of these neighborhood effects on
pedestrian mode choice. Moreover, this study provides a tour stop analysis of  land_use mixing since the mix of
 land_use types at the origin and destination of travel is hypothesized to matter differently for diverse travel
contexts (e.g., travel mode, tour purpose).
This study analyzes the impact of  land_use mix on pedestrian travel within a structural equation modeling
framework. Travel, sociodemographic, and economic data for individuals within the Portland, Eugene, and Salem
metropolitan regions were provided by the 2009-2012 Oregon Household Activity Survey.  land_use data
representing the development patterns, transportation system, and urban design of the study area were
provided by local and regional transportation agencies in each region. Supplemental neighborhood-level
residential and employment data were provided by the 2010 US Census and Longitudinal-Employer Household
Dynamics, respectively. Results of this study provide greater specificity in the measurement of  land_use mix to
policymakers and practitioners interested in the pedestrian travel outcomes associated with implementation of
this smart growth principle.
References
 Brownson, R., Hoehner, C., Day, K., Forsyth, A., & Sallis, J. (2009). Measuring the built environment for
physical activity: State of the science. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 36(4), S99-S123.e12.







Gehrke, S., & Clifton, K. (2014). Operationalizing  land_use diversity at varying geographic scales and its
connection to mode choice: Evidence from Portland, Oregon. Transportation Research Record: Journal
of the Transportation Research Board, 2453, 128-136.
Handy, S., Boarnet, M., Ewing, R., & Killingsworth, R. (2002). How the built environment effects physical
activity: View from urban_planning. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 23(2S), 64-73.
Manaugh, K., & Kreider, T. (2013). What is mixed use? Presenting an interaction method for measuring
 land_use mix. The Journal of transportation and  land_use, 6(1), 63-72.
Song, Y., Merlin, L., & Rodriguez, D. (2013). Comparing measures of urban  land_use mix. Computers,
Environment and Urban system, 42, 1-13.

Abstract Index #: 799
"I'D LOVE TO GET THAT WALK IN, BUT..." HOW USEFUL IS THE HEALTH MESSAGE IN SHIFTING TRANSPORT
PRACTICES?
Abstract System ID#: 963
Individual Paper
KENT, Jennifer [University of Sydney] jennifer.kent@sydney.edu.au
Connections between private car use and popular health are well researched, with car dependency regularly
associated with poor health outcomes. In the context of the transport-health nexus, public health research often
seeks to address the problems inherent to private car use via the promotion of active forms of transportation such as
walking, cycling and public transit. Despite this endorsement, there remains resistance to active transport. While
there is evidence that some city have experienced an increase in the uptake of the use of active transport,
private car use continues to dominate as the preferred way to satisfy requirements and desires to be mobile in
many urban area.
Programs to increase the uptake of active transportation often include strategies to foster awareness of its personal
benefits, such as education about the health benefits associated with physical activity. This paper reports the
results of a study which used qualitative methods to explore the way the physical activity incentive is perceived
by car-drivers when presented with a viable active transportation alternative. Its focus is on the journey to work in
outer suburban Sydney – Australia’s largest city. Applying a novel approach to participant selection, the paper
explores the daily practices and perceptions of those who continue to drive, despite having access to viable
alternative transport.
The paper confirms the findings of other research suggesting that knowledge about the benefits of regular
physical activity will not necessarily translate to the uptake of active modes of transport. This understanding is
advanced to suggest that the endurance of the private car is not solely a product of rational factors such as
awareness of alternatives or physical capacity. Instead, automobility is deeply embedded in ways of navigating
modern life, and barriers to active transportation are more complex than research to date suggests.

Abstract Index #: 800
WILL YOUNG ADULTS RETURN TO DRIVING WHEN THE ECONOMY RECOVERS?
Abstract System ID#: 966
Individual Paper
RALPH, Kelcie [University of California, Los Angeles] kmralph@g.ucla.edu
During the Great Recession, the economic condition of young adult in the United States was poor indeed.
Earnings stagnated and record numbers of young, would-be workers struggled to find jobs. In response to these
economic constraints young people moved back in with their parents, put off marriage, and delayed having
children.

The travel behavior literature has long recognized a close link between travel patterns and an individual’s
economic resources, employment, and roles. Employed adults and parents, for example, each make more trips
on average than adults without jobs or children.
As the economy recovers and young people head back to work, move out, and start families of their own, will
they once again embrace driving?
To answer that question I first identified four distinct traveler types using latent class analysis. The seven
variables used to determine the traveler types incorporate travel over a single day (miles of travel, number of
trips, and share of miles by an automobile) and over a more extended period (automobiles per adult in the
household, diver’s license, annual miles driven, and frequency of public transit use in the past month). The data
for this analysis comes from the United States national household travel surveys in three years: 1995, 2001, and
2009. I find that young adults can be categorized into four mutually exclusive traveler types: Drivers, Longdistance Trekkers, Multimodals, and Car-less.
I estimated a series of multinomial logistic regression models with traveler type as the dependent variable. Two
factors serve as key explanatory variables: Roles (employment, living arrangement, married, has a child) and
Resources (household income quintile and educational attainment). I control statistically for differences in
Residential location and Race/ethnicity.
I find that Roles and Resources are among the strongest predictors of traveler type. Moreover, the relationship
between these factors and travel behavior became stronger over time. Together these results suggest that if
good jobs return, young people will embrace driving once again.
References
 Blumenberg, Evelyn, et al. (2012), 'What's Youth Got To Do With It? Exploring the Travel Behavior of
Teens and Young Adults', (Los Angeles: UCLA Institute of Transportation Studies).
 Buehler, Ralph and Hamre, Andrea (2014), 'The multimodal majority? Driving, walking, cycling, and
public transportation use among American adults', Transportation, 1-21.
 Kuhnimhof, Tobias, et al. (2012), 'Travel trends among young adults in Germany: increasing
multimodality and declining car use for men', Journal of transportation Geography, 24 (0), 443-50.
 Schoettle, Brandon and Sivak, Michael (2013), 'The reasons for the recent decline in young driver
licensing in the U.S.', (Michigan: University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute), 25.
 Ralph, Kelcie (2014), 'Stalled on the road to adulthood? The link between recent changes in travel and
the gloomy life prospects of young adults', Association of Collegiate Schools of Planning (Philadelphia).

Abstract Index #: 801
BUY HERE, POOR HERE? PREDATORY LENDING IN THE AUTOMOBILE INDUSTRY
Abstract System ID#: 968
Individual Paper
BLUMENBERG, Evelyn [University of California, Los Angeles] eblumenb@ucla.edu, presenting author, primary
author
POLLARD, Jane [Newcastle University] jane.pollard@newcastle.ac.uk
In 2011, Ken Bensinger, a writer for the Los Angeles Times, published an exposé on the Buy Here Pay Here (BHPH)
automobile industry. A growing sector of the market, BHPH automobile dealers sell and provide ‘in-house’
finance on used cars to low-income consumers who have either limited credit histories or low-credit scores that
restrict their access to conventional credit markets. In this three-part series, Bensinger highlights abuses in the
industry which include sale prices that exceed Blue Book value, excessive interest rates, and high default and
repossession rates. The articles motivated two pieces of legislation signed into California law—AB 1447 which
mandates that dealers provide warranties on all used cars and AB 1534 which requires dealers to disclose in
writing the fair market value of each vehicle for sale.

The flurry of activity on BHPH dealers in California garnered significant national attention. Yet information on the
industry is largely based on anecdotal evidence. Unlike mortgage lenders who are required by law—the Home
Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA)—to report lending data, no such reporting requirement currently exists for
automobile loans. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the industry is fraught with abuses which greatly
disadvantage low-income households. However, BHPH dealers may also provide a valuable public service by
facilitating automobile ownership among low-income consumers who desperately need the access to
opportunities that automobiles provide.
We are interested in the ways in which BHPH dealers enable and/or exploit low-income consumers. In this paper,
we focus on whether the BHPH industry strategically targets low-income consumers. We first use spatial analysis
to assess whether BHPH dealers in California are more likely to locate in close proximity to particular types of
consumers (by income, race/ethnicity) than other dealership types. We then use discourse analysis (DA) to
investigate the assumptions and ideologies implicit or explicit in written and visual material, how such material is
structured and organized, and how advertising is used to manipulate, legitimate and manufacture consent.
Our findings will inform strategies to facilitate improved financial inclusion in automobile lending, including the
role of consumer regulation, policy to increase the supply of low-cost lenders, and financial literacy education.
If low-cost credit is an integral part of everyday life in economies where wage inflation is largely stagnant for
most income groups outside the top quintile, how can and should it be provided? What types of regulatory
approaches should be enacted to protect consumers yet safeguard consumer options?
References
 Dymski, Gary, Jesus Hernandez, and Lisa Mohanty (2013). “Race, Gender, Power, and the US Subprime
Mortgage and Foreclosure Crisis: A Meso Analysis,” Feminist Economics 19(3): 124-151.
 Karger, Howard Jacob (2003). “No deals on wheels: How and why the poor pay more for basic
transportation,” Journal of Poverty, 7(4): 93-112.
 Seide, Christopher K. (2012). “Consumer Financial Protection Post Dodd-Frank: Solutions to Project
Consumers Against Wrongful Foreclosure Practices and Predatory Subprime Auto Lending,” UPR
Business Law Journal, 3: 219-254.
 Wyly, Elvin K., Mona Atia, Holly Foxcroft, Daniel Hammel, and Kelly Phillips-Watts (2006). “American
Home: Predatory Mortgage Capital and Neighbourhood Spaces of Race and Class Exploitation in the
United States,” Geografisker Annaler, 88B(1): 105–132.

Abstract Index #: 802
THE IMPACT OF SB 375 ON REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 979
Individual Paper
LEDERMAN, Jaimee [University of California, Los Angeles] jaimeel@ucla.edu
I propose to evaluate the impact of The Sustainable comminuty and Climate Protection Act of 2008 (SB 375) on
GHG reduction in California city. SB 375 empowered Metropolitan Planning Organizations (MPOs) to influence
local  land_use and transportation project selection to improve regional connectivity, thereby reducing congestion,
total miles driven (VMT), and GHG emissions. This paper will provide an analysis of competitive project grant
programs administered by MPOs before and after SB 375 to determine whether SB 375 has provided incentives
for more sustainable projects, and, if so, which types of sustainability projects have the greatest chance of
gaining funding based upon the criteria ranking performed by the regional planning organizations.
It has long been theorized that regional planning can address negative externalities of the city, including growing
urban inequality, , environment damage from sprawl and increased congestion. Unfortunately, substantial
roadblocks exist to the creation of powerful regional planning organizations, including municipal land-use control,
competition between jurisdictions for tax-revenue, and the growing dependence on local transportation funding.

These have prevented meaningful regional planning in all but a handful of cases. Paul Peterson (1981) argued
that regional planning could only be increased through state- or federal- level legislation. Simultaneously, there is
growing concern that environment problems must be dealt with at the regional scale, as ecosystem boundaries
are defined independent from political ones.
Transportation emissions account for 37% of California’s GHGs, and reducing total VMT is necessary to reach the
target GHG reductions. SB 375 encourages regional transportation planning and inter-jurisdictional coordination
to reduce VMT through coordination of transportation and planning for housing at the regional scale. MPOs are
responsible for coordinating and funding transportation projects in a region, and SB 375 mandates that each
MPO create a “Sustainable comminuty Strategy” that “describe how the development pattern and
transportation network can work together to feasibly reduce GHG emissions...” (Haney, 2010). Barbour and
Deakin (2012) referred to SB 375 as “..a test case for smart growth climate policy, which should interest
policymakers seeking to implement similar strategies.” The NRDC argued that the law has made clear that “urban
growth and development in California will adapt to the times.” (Eaken, A., J. Horner, and G. Ohland, 2012).
I propose analyze the impact of SB 375 on the awarding of grant funding by MPOs in California. MPOs have
discretionary funding to fund individual projects that meet regional planning goals. Each MPO publishes criteria
and accepts local proposals for grant funding. These proposals are scored according to the criteria and grants are
awarded. I propose an analysis that will look at the impact of SB375 on competitive grant program. Has SB375
changed the criteria that MPOs publicize in calls for grant proposals? Have they changes the factors used and
weighting of these factors for grant evaluation? Do the grant recipient projects increase regional transportation
planning?
For this chapter I will conduct an analysis for the four major California MPOs. I will first identify criteria and
scoring for grant applications before and after SB375. I will then identify the list of applicant projects during those
years, and the grant recipients. I will supplement the analysis with interviews of with MPO staff members who
were instrumental in drafting the grant criteria.
The goal of this analysis is to understand how the MPO provides incentives for projects that will reduce GHG
(such as projects that facilitate access to transit or provide biking infrastructure). I will use the scoring criteria to
determine whether there is an increase in sustainability-focused applicant projects and grant awardees. Based on
the data analysis and the interviews, I will determine whether SB 375 has increased access to discretionary
funding of projects that increase sustainability and reduce GHG emissions.
References
 Barbour, Elisa, and Elizabeth A. Deakin. "Smart Growth Planning for Climate Protection: Evaluating
California's Senate Bill 375." Journal of the American Planning Association 78.1 (2012): 70-86.
 Eaken, A., J. Horner, and G. Ohland. (2012), “A Bold Plan for Sustainable California comminuty: A
Report on The Implementation of Senate Bill 375,” NRDC Report, September 2012.
 Haney, Heather. "Implementing SB 375: Promises and Pitfalls." Ecology L. Currents 37 (2010): 46.
 Peterson, P. E. “City limits.” University of Chicago Press. (1981).

Abstract Index #: 803
EXPLORING SECOND TRIP PATTERNS: AN ANALYSIS OF TRAVEL AT WORK IN PORTLAND
Abstract System ID#: 983
Individual Paper
ATTARD, Nathan [University at Buffalo, SUNY] njattard@buffalo.edu, presenting author, primary author
HWANG, Ha [University at Buffalo, SUNY] hahwang@buffalo.edu
PARK, Jiyoung [University at Buffalo, The State University of New York] jp292@buffalo.edu
The development and implementation of activity-based travel demand forecasting models in US metropolitan
areas have made accessible complex datasets on travel behavior. Utilizing data obtained from the Oregon Travel

and Activity Survey (OTAS), a dataset used to develop the activity-based travel demand forecasting model for
Portland, Oregon, this paper proposes a model for understanding mode choice decisions made by individuals
while at work.
A second-trip, for the purpose of this research, is defined as any trip which originates from a place of work (or
study) and involves a return trip to the same place of work (or study). Incorporating both business and nonbusiness related travel using a nested logit model, this paper seeks to understand the similar and dissimilar
characteristics which inform mode choice after arrival at a place of employment. Factors that will be investigated
in order to understand second-trip mode choice include both OTAS survey responses and built environment
characteristics of both the workplace and place of residence of individuals making second trips.
Given the complexity of understanding mode choice, it is important to develop a model that accounts for spatial
factors, generalized cost of travel, and socio-economic attributes of travelers. The activity-based model exists
within a framework that views individual travel decisions as complex adjustments in behavior reacting to a
demand for activity (Ben-Akiva and Bowman, 27). The availability of places that meet the demand for activity
near a person’s home or work has the potential to inform mode choice decisions for travel made at work.
Despite investigations into the influences of socioeconomic,  land_use, and built environment factors on mode
choice and travel behavior, a comprehensive understanding of travel at work is absent from discussions on travel
behavior. Past investigations of mode choice decisions have found that attitudes that result in mode choice are
not related to personal characteristics, with different travel behaviors often occurring for similar reasons, as
stated on travel surveys (Anable, 2005). Past studies of non-work travel have found that  land_use, when
considered independently, is statistically insignificant in understanding non-work travel (Boarnet and Sarmiento,
1998). However, built environment characteristics were found to significantly impact mode choice when
incorporating generalized cost of travel and socioeconomic factors into a model (Cervero, 2002). A model
developed to understand the relationship of built environment characteristics and auto ownership found that
built environment attributes affect auto ownership, though household demographics have a more dominant
effect (Bhat and Guo, 2007). The understandings developed in these works help guide the selection of
independent variables for the second trip model.
Planners are often employed by business improvement districts, universities, and major employers to implement
travel demand management strategies to mitigate the consequences of single occupancy vehicle commuting. This
reduces both congestion and negative environment consequences. This paper seeks to develop an
understanding of travel at work and contributes to the dialogue on changing travel behavior to support
sustainable mobility.
References
 Anable, J. (2005). ‘Complacent car addicts’ or ‘aspiring environmentists’? Identifying travel behaviour
segments using attitude theory. transportation Policy, 12(1), 65-78.
 Ben-Akiva, M. E., & Bowman, J. L. (1998). Activity based travel demand model system. In Equilibrium
and Advanced Transportation Modelling (pp. 27-46). Springer US.
 Bhat, C. R., & Guo, J. Y. (2007). A comprehensive analysis of built environment characteristics on
household residential choice and auto ownership levels. Transportation Research Part B:
Methodological, 41(5), 506-526.
 Boarnet, M. G., & Sarmiento, S. (1998). Can land-use policy really affect travel behaviour? A study of the
link between non-work travel and land-use characteristics. Urban Studies, 35(7), 1155-1169.
 Cervero, R. (2002). Built environments and mode choice: toward a normative framework. Transportation
Research Part D: transportation and Environment, 7(4), 265-284.

Abstract Index #: 804
NORMATIVE COMPLIANCE VS. INSTRUMENTAL COMPLIANCE IN TRANSPORTATION POLICY
Abstract System ID#: 1009
Individual Paper

GAO, Jingkang [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] gaoj@mit.edu, presenting author, primary author
ZHAO, Jinhua [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] jinhua@mit.edu
Why do people comply with the law? Legal scholars consider two perspectives with regard to compliance. The
instrumental perspective refers to compliance as a response to tangible—often immediate and monetary—
incentives; it assumes that people make decisions because of extrinsic motivations. Economists tend to think of
compliance through the instrumental perspective as it makes modeling straightforward, and policymakers often
implicitly adopt the instrumental perspective because they control society’s resources. Indeed, most studies have
examined transportation law compliance through the instrumental perspective by studying the relationship
between crime rate and penalties. The other perspective on compliance is the normative perspective, the theory
that people make decisions based on values; it assumes that people make decisions because of intrinsic
motivations. The normative perspective, championed by psychologists, is further divided into two components:
legitimacy and morality. Legitimacy refers to the extent to which the individual respects the governing body’s
right to establish and enforce laws. Morality refers to the extent to which the individual supports any particular
law. Previous literature has added the normative perspective of transportation law compliance without
considering the relationship between the instrumental perspective and the normative perspective. This paper
uniquely examines transportation law compliance through a comprehensive framework of instrumental and
normative compliance as well as their interactions in people’s behavior with regard to compliance.
The motivation behind this study is the phenomenon of non-compliance with the car ownership control policy in
Shanghai. The explosive growth of automobiles in China in recent years have led to the adoption of car ownership
control policy in major Chinese city such as the car license plate auction policy instituted in Shanghai.
However, a significant percentage of drivers in Shanghai have circumvented the auction process and drive
vehicles with cheaper, non-local license plates on Shanghai’s elevated roads. Violation of the law at such a high
level necessitates the question of how the policy should be altered to raise the level of compliance.
Through data analysis of a survey given to drivers in Shanghai containing questions addressing both normative
and instrumental compliance, this paper takes a novel approach in studying the roles of normative compliance
and instrumental compliance as well as their crowding effects on each other in people’s behavior in response to
Shanghai’s car license plate auction policy. In particular, this study explores the roles of legitimacy, morality,
incentives, and reputation and their interactions in the individual’s decision making. By exploring motivations
behind compliance, policy makers can adjust the congestion reduction policy to increase its effectiveness in
Shanghai and provide a foundation for effective policy in other city. Moreover, legal authorities and policy
makers should seek compliance across all laws and regulations to make governance more effective. Through the
lens of analyzing compliance in one particularly important issue, this study provides a step in understanding and
establishing conditions that promote compliance with transportation law at a higher level.
References
 Becker, Gary (1968), “Crime and Punishment: an Economic Approach, ” Journal of Political Economy, 76,
169-217.
 Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2006. "Incentives and Prosocial Behavior." American Economic
Review, 96(5): 1652-1678.
 Polinsky, Mitchel and Steven Shavell (1979), “The optimal tradeoff between the probability and
magnitude of fines”, American Economic Review, 69, 880-891.
 Tyler, Tom R. Why People Obey the Law. Princeton, NJ: Princeton UP, 2006. Print.

Abstract Index #: 805
WHO ARE THE TRAVELERS IN YOUR NEIGHBORHOOD?
Abstract System ID#: 1013
Individual Paper
VOULGARIS, Carole [University of California, Los Angeles] caroleturley@ucla.edu, presenting author

BLUMENBERG, Evelyn [University of California, Los Angeles] eblumenb@ucla.edu
BROWN, Anne [University of California, Los Angeles] aebrown0316@gmail.com
RALPH, Kelcie [University of California, Los Angeles] kmralph@g.ucla.edu
TAYLOR, Brian [UCLA] btaylor@ucla.edu
Are young adults in the United States driving less than they used to because they live in more walkable and urban
environments? To answer that question we first identify four traveler types and classify neighborhood in the
United States. We use the two typologies in descriptive and multinomial logistic regression analysis.
Most studies of travel behavior analyze a single dimension of travel at a time: miles traveled (Taylor et al. 2013),
number of trips (Smart et al. 2013), or extent of multimodality (Buehler and Hamre 2014). These may be related
to one or more individual dimensions of the built environment, such as measures of residential density or land
use diversity (Ewing and Cervero 2010). We expand on those studies by developing holistic measures of both
travel and the built environment.
We characterize travel by incorporating mobility, trip-making, and access to an automobile into a single, readily
understood variable using latent profile analysis (Ralph 2014). To account for day-to-day variation in travel, we
incorporate data on annual miles driven and the use of public transit over the past month when identify the
traveler types. The 2009 United States National Household Travel Survey (NHTS) is the source for all traveler
information.
To comprehensively characterize residential location, we develop a second typology: neighborhood types. To do
this, we utilize the environment Protection Agency’s Smart Location Database and data from the U.S. Census.
Using cluster analysis, we categorize each census tract in the United States (over 70,000 in all) into mutually
exclusive neighborhood types.
Next, we use the two typologies to descriptively explore the travel behavior of young adults in each
neighborhood type. Finally, to determine the independent effect of neighborhood types, we estimate a
multinomial logistic regression model of traveler type, controlling for other factors known to affect travel
behavior. We focus our interpretation of these results on the independent variable neighborhood type.
Our findings suggest the importance of accounting for the multi-dimensional nature of both travel behavior and
neighborhood characteristics in order to formulate broadly applicable plans and policy to encourage sustainable
travel decisions without reducing access to opportunity.
References
 Buehler, Ralph and Hamre, Andrea (2014), 'The multimodal majority? Driving, walking, cycling, and
public transportation use among American adults', Transportation, 1-21.
 Ewing, R., & Cervero, R. (2010). Travel and the built environment: a meta-analysis. Journal of the
American planning association, 76(3), 265-294.
 Ralph, Kelcie (2014), 'Stalled on the road to adulthood? The link between recent changes in travel and
the gloomy life prospects of young adults', Association of Collegiate Schools of Planning (Philadelphia).
 Smart, Michael, Blumenberg, Evelyn, and Taylor, Brian (2013), 'Trip-making Participation of Youth:
Trends From 1990-2009', 92nd Annual Meeting of the Transportation Research Board (Washington D.C.).
 Taylor, Brian, et al. (2013), 'Who knows about kids these days? Analyzing the determinants of youth and
adult person-miles of travel in 1990, 2001, and 2009?', 92nd Annual Meeting of the Transportation
Research Board (Washington D.C.).

Abstract Index #: 806
IMPACT OF PLANNED TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENTS ON PROPERTY VALUES IN HONOLULU, HAWAII
Abstract System ID#: 1017
Individual Paper

BHATTACHARYA, Torsha [University of Hawaii at Manoa] torshab@hawaii.edu
Transit oriented developments are expected to reduce auto-dependency, spur economic development as well as
increasing property values in the transit adjacent area. But some research has shown that due to the ‘disamenity
zone’ immediately adjacent to the transit lines, property values may decrease. On the other hand characteristics
like recreational and gathering places seem to positively affect housing prices.
Honolulu is the first city in the United States to implement the fully automated driverless and an above-ground or
elevated transit system. The Honolulu Authority for Rapid Transportation (HART) has started construction of the
rail that is expected to be completed in 2019. The rail system plans to connect comminuty with the airport,
major shopping centers and downtown Honolulu and reduce congestion. The rail stations are planned as mixed
use transit oriented development (TOD) focusing on walking, bicycling and mass transit system and supporting
residential and commercial development. The planned TODs are the Aiea-Pearl City TOD consisting of Leeward
Community College, Pearl Highlands, and Pearlridge stations; the Airport Area TOD consisting of Pearl Harbor
Naval Base, Honolulu International Airport, and Lagoon Drive stations; The Ala Moana Center station; The
Downtown TOD consisting of Iwilei, Chinatown and Downtown stations; The East Kapolei TOD consisting of
Ho'opili, University of Hawai'i at West Oahu and East Kapolei stations; The Halawa Makai TOD focusing on the
Aloha Stadium station; The Kalihi TOD consisting of Middle Street, Kalihi and Kapalama stations; The Waipahu
TOD focusing on West Loch Station and Waipahu Transit Center Station.
Using hedonic price models the author investigates the effects of planned TODs along the transit route, on the
property values in Honolulu, Hawaii. Hawaii is known for its scenic beaches and beautiful views as well as its
excessive congestion and high cost of living. If the rail investment and TODs result in higher property values, the
availability of affordable housing could decrease. On the other hand if the property values around the TODs
decrease due to the ‘disamenity’ then steps should be taken to reduce the harmful  impact of noise, and
vibration on the residents and the tourists.
References
• Bowes, D.R. and K.R. Ihlanfeldt. (2001). “Identifying the  impact of Rail Transit Stations on Residential
Property Values”, Journal of Urban Economics 50, 1: 1-25.
• Duncan, M. (2011). The impact of transit-oriented development on housing prices in San Diego, CA.
Urban Studies, Vol.48, 101 -127
• Hess, D.B. and T.M. Almeida (2007). Impact of Proximity to Light Rail Rapid Transit on Station-area
Property Values in Buffalo, New York. Urban Studies, Vol. 44, No. 5-6, 1041-1068
• Kay, A. I., Noland, R. B. and DiPetrillo, S. (2014). Residential property valuations near transit stations with
transit-oriented development. Journal of transportation Geography, Vol.39, 131-140
• Song, Y and G.J. Knaap (2003). New urbanism and housing values: a disaggregate assessment. Journal of
Urban Economics, Vol.54, 218–238

Abstract Index #: 807
EXPLORING SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN CRASHES AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT: A GEOGRAPHICALLY
WEIGHTED REGRESSION APPROACH
Abstract System ID#: 1021
Individual Paper
WANG, Xiaoguang [Central Michigan University] wang9x@cmich.edu, presenting author
HUANG, Yuan [Department of Geography, University of South Carolina] yhuang@email.sc.edu, primary author
PATTON, David [Central Michigan University] patto1d@cmich.edu
Traffic crashes are among the five major causes of death in the United States. Researchers are seeking ways to
understand the factors that attribute to crashes, with the aim to reduce crash occurrence and severity. The built
environment, as described by  land_use patterns and road configurations, may have important linkages to travel
safety:  land_use patterns along the roads create travel demand which generates traffic volumes; the mixture of

 land_uses influences the level of conflicts between vehicles, pedestrians, and the environment, which
subsequently  impact the type, frequency, and severity of crashes. Road system, an integral part of the built
environment, determine the maximum traffic flow obtainable on a given roadway which also regulates and
influences traffic speed, a key determinant of crash severity.
Past studies relied on global statistical models to disentangle the interrelationships between crashes and various
characteristics of the built environment (for example, density,  land_use mix, street layouts, etc.). Although global
models are powerful in discerning global relationships, they ignore the special characteristics of spatial data such
as spatial autocorrelation and spatial non-stationarity. Most global statistical models require observations to be
independent; however, spatial phenomena including crash occurrence are usually spatially correlated: accident
black spots, a place where traffic accidents are historically and disproportionately concentrated, can be found in
many comminuty. Global statistical models also assume that the modelled relationships between a response
variable and explanatory variables are consistent across the geographic area (spatial stationarity); however,
spatial relationship at one location may be unique relative to other locations and hence the “global” parameters
estimated by using all available observations may be inadequate to reveal the relationship at any given location.
This research applied Geographically Weighted Regression (GWR) model to understand the relationship between
crashes and the local built environment in Detroit Region (containing Wayne County, Oakland County, and
Macomb County), where 527,749 crashes happened from 2007 to 2011 according to Michigan Traffic Crash Facts.
Our research aim to address two main questions: does the relationship between the built environment and
crashes vary across space? If so, what are the local relationships between the built environment and crashes? By
estimating local parameters for a regression model at a given location, GWR allows the relationship between
variables to vary over space.
The findings of this research would help transportation planners, traffic engineers, and  land_use planners to
better understand the interactions between the built environment and crashes that are situated in their local
communities. Our research will also demonstrate the feasibility and values of using spatial models in traffic,
transportation, and  land_use studies.
References
 Brunsdon, C., Fotheringham, A. S., & Charlton, M. E. (1996). Geographically weighted regression: a
method for exploring spatial nonstationarity. Geographical analysis, 28(4), 281-298.
 Dumbaugh, E., & Li, W. (2010). Designing for the safety of pedestrians, cyclists, and motorists in urban
environments. Journal of the American Planning Association, 77(1), 69-88.
 Ewing, R., & Dumbaugh, E. (2009). The Built Environment and Traffic Safety A Review of Empirical
Evidence. Journal of Planning Literature, 23(4), 347-367.
 Kim, K., Brunner, I. M., & Yamashita, E. Y. (2006). Influence of  land_use, population, employment, and
economic activity on accidents. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research
Board, 1953(1), 56-64.

Abstract Index #: 808
DOES ACCESSIBILITY MATTER? UNDERSTANDING THE EFFECT OF JOB ACCESSIBILITY ON LABOR MARKET
OUTCOMES
Abstract System ID#: 1027
Individual Paper
JIN, Jangik [University of Wisconsin-Madison] jjin8@wisc.edu, presenting author, primary author
PAULSEN, Kurt [University of Wisconsin] kpaulsen@wisc.edu
For the past decades, urban economists, geographers, and social scientists have raised a question how location
and access to employment opportunities affect labor market outcomes such as occupational status, income, and
labor force participation. This subject that geographical factors are important in labor market success is based on
the spatial mismatch hypothesis. Since Kain’s (1968) spatial mismatch hypothesis, the relationship between

urban spatial structure and labor market outcomes has been debated among many scholars. However, there is
no consensus in the literature on the effect. Several scholars have argued that these contradictory results are
mostly due to measurement and methodological errors (Mouw, 2000; Houston, 2005; Ihlanfeldt, 2006; Bania, et
al., 2008).
This study examines the effect of access to employment opportunities on labor market outcomes, especially
unemployment rates and household income in the Chicago Metropolitan Area during 2000-2010. Using micro
employment data from ESRI and Shen’s accessibility measures, we calculate job accessibility for groups by race
and income at the block group level. In order to deal with the endogeneity problem, we use two time periods of
data and fixed-effect models in a spatial lag model (SLM) approach. Findings show that job accessibility plays a
significant role in explaining unemployment rate and household income. Particularly, the results reveal that an
increase in job accessibility for overall, African-Americans, and low income households reduces unemployment
rate and improves household income. These results provide evidence consistent with Kain’s spatial mismatch
hypothesis.
References
 Kain, J (1968) Housing segregation, negro employment, and metropolitan decentralization. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 82(2): 175 -197.
 Mouw, T (2000) Job relocation and the racial gap in unemployment in Detroit and Chicago, 1980 to
1990. American Sociological Review 65(5): 730–753.
 Houston, D (2005) Methods to test the spatial mismatch hypothesis. Economic Geography 81(4): 407434.
 Ihlanfeldt, K (2006) A primer on spatial mismatch within urban labor markets, in: R. Arnott and D.
McMillen (Eds) A Companion to Urban Economics, ch. 24. Boston, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
 Bania, N, Leete, L and Coulton, C (2008) Job access, employment and earnings: Outcomes for welfare
leavers in a US urban labor market. Urban Studies 45(11): 2179-2202.

Abstract Index #: 809
THE IMPACT OF PASSENGER RAIL STATIONS ON THE SPATIAL BEHAVIOR OF RETAIL ACTIVITIES
Abstract System ID#: 1039
Individual Paper
SAEED, Basheer [University of Maryland at College Park] bmsaeed@umd.edu, presenting author, primary author
ISEKI, Hiroyuki [University of Maryland at College Park] hiseki@umd.edu
Objective
Since the early 1970s, the Baltimore-Washington metropolitan area has been experiencing significant investment
in passenger rail infrastructure. One of major impetuses of such investment was to spur economic development.
Since contemporary planners see transit oriented development (TOD) as an essential planning principle, the
objectives of rail investments now include the promotion of economic activities around rail stations, as well as
alleviating traffic congestion and reducing greenhouse gas emissions through the reduction of car use
(Vickerman, 2008; Belzer, 2011). While there has been an increasing amount of literature that examines the
relationship between passenger rail transit and economic development at the macro level, the subject needs
more research to gauge micro-level organization of economic activities. A limited number of studies have
examined the relationship between proximity to rail transit stations and retail activities, which are considered to
be one of the key components of mixed-use development (Schuetz 2014). This study examines whether the
opening of passenger rail stations in Maryland has stimulated retail activities within a half-mile buffer from rail
stations. What makes this study unique are: 1) the use of a more advanced statistical method, namely Propensity
Score Matching, and 2) the categorization of the retail trade sector into different subsectors to examine the
impact of rail stations on each subsector.
Data and Methodology

Within the conventional regression models, there is a potential bias induced by nonrandom placement of rail
stations. To correct for this, the study uses Propensity Score Matching (PSM) method which allows us to build
counterfactual control groups that are similar in characteristic (i.e. distance to CBD, distance to nearest highway
exit, population density, employment density, race, and land-uses/zoning at a census tract level) to treatment
groups prior to the treatment (i.e. the placement of rail stations). The impact of rail stations is then measured by
the difference between control and treatment groups in terms of retail growth.
The study area includes five jurisdictions in the state of Maryland that contain heavy and light passenger rail
stations examined in this study. The main data source for this study is the National Establishment Time-Series
(NETS) dataset, derived from Dun & Bradstreet (D&B) records. For each industrial category, this dataset includes
information on NAICS industry code, firm location, firm size, and dates of firm birth and death between year 1992
and 2009. The 3-digit NAICS code is used for the retail trade industry, which extends the analysis to 12 types of
retail activities. Data from American Community Survey (ACS) are also used for the socio-demographic variables.
Results
After accounting for the spatial and socio-demographics variables, some of the expected results of this study are:
1) area within a half-mile buffer from passenger rail stations experience higher growth in retail activities,
compared to area with similar characteristics but without the presence of a rail station; 2) some retail activities,
such as food and beverage stores, are more likely to experience growth by the presence of a passenger rail
station than other retail trade sectors, such as motor vehicle and parts dealers.
Policy and Research Implications
From a social stand point, the presence of diverse retail services in a neighborhood is found to bring about
important quality of life implications for residents. From a transportation stand point, the presence or absence of
neighborhood retail services is a good predictor of mode choice. Cervero and Duncan (2006) found that the
residents of mixed-use neighborhood with better access to retail employment have lower daily vehicle mile
traveled (VMT). Therefore, this study will provide valuable information about the extent to which passenger rail
investments improve the quantity and diversity of retail services. The results will be relevant to transportation
planners and elected officials who are interested in using transit stations as a vehicle for economic development.
References
 Belzer, Dena. 2011. Transit-oriented development (TOD) and employment. Oakland, CA: Center for
Transit-Oriented Development.
http://reconnectingamerica.org/assets/Uploads/TODandEmploymentFINALMay2011.pdf.
 Schuetz, J. 2014. "Do rail transit stations encourage neighbourhood retail activity?" Urban Studies.
 Vickerman R. 2008. "Transit investment and economic development". Research in Transportation
Economics. 23 (1): 107-115.
 Grant, Jill, and Katherine Perrott. 2011. "Where Is the Café? The Challenge of Making Retail Uses Viable
in Mixed-use Suburban Developments". Urban Studies. 48 (1): 177-195.
 Cervero, R., and M. Duncan. 2006. "Which Reduces Vehicle Travel More: Jobs-Housing Balance or RetailHousing Mixing?" JOURNAL- AMERICAN PLANNING ASSOCIATION. 72 (4): 475-490.

Abstract Index #: 810
IDENTIFYING FACTORS THAT IMPACT LOGISTICS CLUSTERS’ COMPETITIVENESS
Abstract System ID#: 1048
Individual Paper
HYLTON, Peter [Georgia Institute of Technology] peter.hylton@gatech.edu, presenting author, primary author
ROSS, Catherine [Georgia Institute of Technology] catherine.ross@coa.gatech.edu
Logistics clusters are groups of transportation, warehousing, and other logistics firms in close proximity and tight
interaction with each other (Elbert and Schönberger 2009). Regional development theory provides insights into
how clusters form under the influences of external economies, centrality, accessibility, and factor endowments.

Logistics clusters result from many elements that can promote agglomeration, including a series of ‘cluster-type’
interactions among firms that are thought to increase the firms’ efficiency and competitiveness (van den Heuvel
et al. 2014). Past research in logistics clusters has examined the activities that clusters allow through surveys or
interviews (van den Heuvel et al. 2014), or studied clusters as a function of their physical agglomeration (Rivera et
al. 2014). Each of these approaches is important, but neither alone accounts for the interrelationships among
elements sustaining logistics clusters. Therefore, this research attempts to join the literature’s divergent
directions. It examines the topic of competitiveness by asking if logistics employment grows faster in counties
with logistics clusters than in other counties. Higher growth rates are a manifestation of competitiveness when
variables encouraging agglomeration are controlled for. If higher growth rates are observed, the research will
assess the extent to which growth rates are a function of endogenous and exogenous variables.
This research uses a path analysis technique applied to counties in the lower 48 U.S. states to identify the
interrelationships among variables that contribute to clustering. First, logistics clusters are identified using
measures of establishment and employment concentration derived from Rivera et al. (2014). The path analysis is
structured to determine how the rates of county-level logistics employment growth change as a function of
logistics agglomeration, centrality, accessibility, and measurable externalities such as congestion. The data
sources include employment and establishment data from the U.S. Census Bureau’s County Business Patterns at
the county level among others.
The work is relevant for both planning research and practice. Clusters and agglomeration have a strong
foundation in regional development theory, which anchors many of planning’s spatial theories. A large amount
of work has sought to identify area of intensive logistics activity, including at megaregion scales (Dablanc and
Ross 2012). Simultaneously, this work advances a line of research that has focused specifically on logistics
clusters as places where interaction among firms increase firm competitiveness (van den Heuvel et al. 2014,
Rivera et al. 2014). This is also an important time to examine cluster competitiveness. Several states and city
are encouraging logistics cluster formation for economic development through training program, incentives, and
enhancement of transportation infrastructure. This research will provide a foundation upon which to evaluate
these policy’ contribution to economic development, controlling for variables that the county or state cannot
influence.
References
 Dablanc, Laetitia, and Catherine Ross. 2012. "Atlanta: a mega logistics center in the Piedmont Atlantic
Megaregion (PAM)." Journal of transportation geography 24: 432-442.
 Elbert, Ralf, and Robert Schönberger. 2009. “Logistics Clusters-How Regional Value Chains Speed Up
Global Supply Chains.” In Rapid Modelling for Increasing Competitiveness, 233–45. Springer.
http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-1-84882-748-6_19.
 Rivera, Liliana, Yossi Sheffi, and Roy Welsch. 2014. “Logistics Agglomeration in the US.” Transportation
Research Part A: Policy and Practice 59 (January): 222–38. doi:10.1016/j.tra.2013.11.009.
 Van den Heuvel, Frank P., Peter W. de Langen, Karel H. van Donselaar, and Jan C. Fransoo. 2014.
“Proximity Matters: Synergies through Co-Location of Logistics Establishments.” International Journal of
Logistics Research and Applications 17 (5): 377–95. doi:10.1080/13675567.2013.870141.

Abstract Index #: 901
PATHWAYS TO HEALTH AND OPPORTUNITY? ASSESSING WALKABILITY AND EQUITY IN A MID-SIZE CITY
Abstract System ID#: 1055
Individual Paper
BROOKS, Kerry R. [Eastern Washington University] kbrooks@ewu.edu
KELLEY, William [Eastern Washington University] wkelley@ewu.edu
Abstract
Pedestrian accessibility is a primary component of just and vital city. Presence of usable sidewalks is the
foundation of pedestrian accessibility, but their walkability depends upon socio-economic and contextual

attributes. The mere presence of a sidewalk may not facilitate its usability or walkability. environment justice
considerations imply that accessibility and walkability be fairly distributed in order to maximize individual,
societal and environment benefits and to respond to limitations imposed by socio-economic status (SES). This
paper draws upon a micro-detailed regional pedestrian dataset to characterize and assess accessibility and
walkability in an environment justice context. The main hypothesis is that SES is negatively correlated with
positive local walkability. Planning recommendations for addressing revealed inequities are provided as is
methodology useful for similar assessments elsewhere.
Introduction
An important objective of urban_planning is to improve community livability. Livability can be considered the sum
of all parts that contribute to the community’s quality of life including the built and natural environment,
economic well being, social capital and equity, and accessibility to educational, cultural, entertainment, and
recreational pursuits. In addition, recent research on walkability has highlighted the importance of built
environment and its relationship to facilitating physical activity and health (Frank et al. 2006).
On the built environment side, walkability is an important contributor to health and livability, and foundational to
accessibility. At a basic level, walkability can be defined as an area that accommodates and encourages walking.
Factors associated with walkability include socio-economic characteristics, short travel distances between origin
and destination, transit access,  land_use mix, residential density, positive streetscape features, and connectivity
(Frank et al. 2006, Moudon et al. 2006).
Certain socio-economic characteristics make the ability to walk to and from destinations vital. For example,
lower SES may be associated with lower rates of automobile ownership, making the ability to walk to destinations
or public transportation key in accomplishing life needs. Age and infirmity can similarly impact availability of
automobile transportation, again necessitating the use of pedestrian facilities. An equity expectation would be
that neighborhood with more residents dependent on pedestrian facilities would contain more features
supporting walkability (c.f. Arnold 2007).
The latter may not be the case. For example, Neckerman et al. (2009) explored differences between poor and
non-poor neighborhood’ walkability. Controlled, paired comparisons revealed lower activity levels in poor
neighborhoods. Neckerman et al. noted that differences between the two environments centered on attractive
and safe streetscapes, including the presence of amenities such as street trees.
This paper follows those lines, exploring characteristics of attractive, safe, and suitable streetscapes that
contribute to walkability, as well as the equity implications of the distribution of walkable pedestrian
infrastructure. Specifically the role of sidewalks and street trees are examined using data from a mid-sized urban
community: Spokane, Washington. We test the hypothesis that walkability is inequitably distributed in this
community.
Methodology
Similar to Ibes (2015) and Neckerman et al. (2009), this work characterizes both the supply of walkable
infrastructure in the study area as well as demand for their equitable use. The former characterization is based
upon a detailed GIS inventory of the physical characteristics of pedestrian infrastructure and its surroundings,
including street trees and built form. The latter is based upon Census data, and data from the health district.
Geo-statistical analysis of the spatial distribution of supply and demand and facilitate a quantitative response to
our hypothesis. The results provide a basis for recommendations to redress inequities and a sampling frame for
further micro-assessment of walking activity.
References
 Arnold, CA. 2007. Fair and Healthy  land_use: environment Justice and Planning. American Planning
Association, Planning Advisory Service #549/550.
 Frank, L. D. et al. 2006. Many Pathways from  land_use to Health. Journal of the American Planning
Association 72:1): 75-87. http://www.actrees.org/files/Research/JAPAFrank06.pdf.







Ibes, D. 2015. A multi-dimensional classification and equity analysis of an urban park system: A novel
methodology and case study application. Landscape and urban_planning 137:122-137.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169204614003417.
Neckerman, et al. 2009. Disparities in Urban Neighborhood Conditions: Evidence from GIS Measures and
Field Observations in New York City. Journal of Public Health Policy 30:S264-S285. http://www.palgravejournals.com/jphp/journal/v30/nS1/full/jphp200847a.html
Moudon, AV, et al. 2006. Operational Definitions of Walkable Neighborhood: Theoretical and Empirical
Insights. Journal of Physical Activity and Health 3(1):99-117.
http://activelivingresearch.net/files/JPAH_7_Moudon_1.pdf

Abstract Index #: 811
SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT: LONGER-TERM  impact OF THE LONDON CONGESTION CHARGE
Abstract System ID#: 1056
Individual Paper
BROADDUS, Andrea [University of California at Berkeley] abroaddus@berkeley.edu
The use of congestion pricing to reduce car trips into London’s central business district created a great natural
experiment. The congestion charge was implemented in 2003 within a context of long-term transit expansion and
empowered regional governance. In 2000, London’s government was re-structured to create a new regional
transportation authority, transportation for London (TfL), with powers over public transportation and a strategic road
network. TfL implemented a number of strategies to increase transit capacity, including reallocating roadspace to
create a regional network of dedicated bus lanes, and retiming traffic signals to prioritize buses and pedestrian
safety. A key measure was integrating bus and rail services into a seamless regional system. In the short term, a
congestion charge influences travel decisions, but over the longer term, it may have secondary  impact
influencing car ownership and location choices, especially if paired with improved transit and pedestrian access,
as in London. (Whitehead 2005) London offers empirical evidence to inform the debate over whether congestion
charging will have a dispersing or concentrating effect, and which types of firms and households are most
sensitive (Anas & Xu 1999, Eliasson & Mattson 2001, Safirova, Houde et al. 2006)
This paper considers the congestion charge as part of a package of measures that has resulted in regional scale
travel and  land_use  impact. Car use and vehicle miles travelled (VMT) has declined throughout London, in spite
of steady employment and population growth. From 2001-2011, traffic remained 15% lower than previous levels
in the charged zone, there was zero traffic growth in Inner London, and less than 5% traffic growth in Outer
London. (Mayor of London, 2011) This is partly due to the congestion charge increasing from 5 to 11.50 (19.00)
over ten years, but mainly to long-term adjustments to a rapidly improving public transportation accessibility. By 2012,
the index of public transportation use had risen to 133.6 from the base year 2000, while the index of private transport
use fell to 80.7. (Mayor of London, 2014) London's CO2 emissions from the transportation sector were reduced to 15%
below 1990 levels by 2010, largely through reduced VMT and regional-scale mode shift. (Mayor of London, 2011)
The question of how and why travel and location trends have changed over a twenty-year timeframe was
approached through a combination of expert interviews and longitudinal data analysis. Over forty interviews
were conducted with transportation experts, advocacy and business groups, and developers during a year of
fieldwork in London. Long-term trends were constructed from time-series data drawn from a wide range of
sources, including the Census, household travel surveys, traffic counts, transit ridership, home sales and
commercial rents. Several major secondary trends were identified: reduced car ownership in Central and Inner
London, increased concentration of employment in Central London, and increased concentration of firms and
households in Inner London.
An unexpected finding from interviews was the deliberate reduction of traffic capacity inside the charged zone,
by an estimated 30%, in order to slow travel speeds. An immediate impact of the charge was to increase travel
speeds. As TfL reconfigured roadspace and signals to prioritize buses and pedestrians, travel speeds slowed back

to pre-congestion charging levels. In this way, the traffic reduction achieved by pricing allowed for a ‘capacity
grab’ through changes to the infrastructure that locked in lower traffic volumes and slower speeds.
Findings from an investigation of firm location patterns was using business microdata will also be presented. A
panel of 120,000 firms was created and location choices were tracked from 1997 to 2012, revealing evidence that
larger firms prefer locating inside the charged area at a greater rate than they did prior to charging. This is likely
due to the major improvements in transit access to the charged area.
As one of the first long-term empirical studies of congestion charging, this study makes an important contribution
to the literature.
References
 Anas, A. & R. Xu, 1999. "Congestion,  land_use and job dispersion: A general equilibrium model," Journal
of Urban Economics, Vol. 45, No. 3.
 Eliasson, J. & L.G. Mattson, 2001. "Transport and location effects of road pricing: A simulation
approach," Journal of transportation Economics and Policy, Vol. 35.
 Safirova, E.A., S. Houde et al., 2006. "Long-term consequences of congestion pricing," Resources for the
Future, Washington, DC.
 Whitehead, T., 2005. "Transport charging interventions and economic activity," transportation Policy, Vol. 12,
No. 5.
 Mayor of London, 2011 and 2014. "London Plan Annual Monitoring Report 7 and 10," Greater London
Authority, London.

Abstract Index #: 812
INVESTIGATING PREFERENCES FOR TRANSIT- AND PEDESTRIAN-ACCESSIBLE neighborhood AMONG LOWINCOME AND MORE AFFLUENT HOUSEHOLDS THROUGH INSIGHTS FROM THE DENVER REGION
Abstract System ID#: 1062
Individual Paper
LUCKEY, Kara [University of Colorado, Denver] kara.luckey@ucdenver.edu, presenting author, primary author
MARSHALL, Wesley [University of Colorado, Denver] Wesley.Marshall@ucdenver.edu
Support for rail transit is thriving, with projects underway and planned in regions across the U.S. There is also
widespread acknowledgement that rail transit is likely to achieve its environment, economic and social goals
when paired with development patterns that incorporate ‘compact’ features such as mixed- land_uses, higher
densities, and high-quality design that encourages walking and biking (Cervero et al. 2004; Ewing & Cervero
2010). Coordinated development between transit and the built environment is particularly important for lowincome households who are less likely to own cars and more likely to rely on transit (Taylor & Morris 2014).
However, despite increased interest and support for neighborhood embodying the characteristics of TOD, there
continues to be a limited understanding of the factors that motivate households to locate in transit-rich
neighborhoods, as well as those that may prevent households from doing so.
To this end, we explore issues around residential decision-making and social equity in the context of the Denver
metropolitan area in order to better-understand preferences for compact, transit-supportive, and pedestrianfriendly environments among residents with different residential locations and income levels. We specifically
investigate implications of these issues for social equity by first identifying the preferences of low-income
households (defined using U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development thresholds) in deciding where to
live through several logit models that estimate preferences for neighborhood with various transportation and
 land_use characteristics. We then use statistical comparisons of socio-economic characteristics to understand the
extent to which low-income groups are realizing those preferences. While standard approaches to understanding
residential location preferences are useful in identifying general trends in public opinion, they are not able to
account for the complex housing, transportation, and  land_use tradeoffs households must consider in deciding
where to live. Therefore, we instead use a choice-based conjoint-analysis that requires respondents to select

between two neighborhood with different characteristics, each with its own perceived advantages and
disadvantages, thus modeling real-life decision-making processes more closely (Levine & Frank 2007).
We find evidence of strong preferences for transit-accessible and pedestrian- and bicycle-friendly environments
across all income levels. Further investigations suggest that attitudes toward  land_use and transportation play a
strong role in mediating residential preferences. In evaluating differences between low-income and more affluent
households, we find the former to hold stronger preferences for transit-accessible environments. However, a
comparison of the socio-economic characteristics of station area residents and those living outside of station
areas suggests that low-income households are not realizing these preferences to the same extent as higherincome groups. Substantially fewer households making less than $25,000 current live in station area, while a
disproportionately higher proportion of households making between $75,000 and $150,000 live in station area.
Furthermore, a comparison of the characteristics of residents who moved to station area after light rail as
compared to those who moved to station area before reveals that fewer low-income and carless households
(and more high-income households with multiple vehicles) are recent in-movers to station area. These findings
are consistent with recent research demonstrating increased housing costs in neighborhood with transit access
(Bartholomew & Ewing 2011). Given that these trends are likely to exacerbate, it may become increasingly
difficult for low-income households to realize their preferences for transit-accessible and pedestrian-friendly
neighborhoods without an increase in the supply of affordable housing near stations. Our findings provide vital
insights for planners and policymakers as they work to leverage the benefits of rail transit among all residents,
and disadvantaged populations in particular.
References
 Cervero, R., S. Murphy, C. Ferrell, et al. (2004). Transit Cooperative Research Program Report 102:
Transit-oriented development in the United States: Experiences, challenges, and prospects.
 Ewing, R., & R. Cervero. (2010). Travel and the built environment: A meta-analysis. Journal of the
American Planning Association, 76(3), 265-294.
 Taylor, B. D., & E. A. Morris. (2014). Public transportation objectives and rider demographics: Are
transit’s priorities poor public policy? Transportation, 42(2), 347-367.
 Levine, J., & L. D. Frank. (2007). Transportation and land-use preferences and residents’ neighborhood
choices: The sufficiency of compact development in the Atlanta region. Transportation, 34(2), 255-274.
 Bartholomew, K., & R. Ewing. (2011). Hedonic price effects of pedestrian- and transit-oriented
development. Journal of Planning Literature, 26(1), 18-34.

Abstract Index #: 813
DISTANCE VARIATION, BUILT AND NATURAL environment CORRELATES OF ACTIVE TRAVEL TO SCHOOL
Abstract System ID#: 1063
Individual Paper
KIM, Young Jae [Texas A&M University] yjkim2011@tamu.edu
Walking or bicycling to school has been considered a healthy travel mode for children as it helps increase daily
physical activity [1] and potentially reduce obesity among school-aged children [2]. However, the prevalence of
children engaging in active travel to school (ATS) in U.S. has dramatically decreased [3], while the rate of child
obesity has increased [4] during the past few decades. In order to promote ATS, studies on environment
correlates of ATS offer some important insights related to community-level intervention strategies that can
facilitate population-level behavior changes that are also more sustainable.
Among the environment factors, the long home-to-school distance has been reported as the significant barrier
to ATS [5]. However, few studies examined whether the roles of distance differ depending on certain distance
thresholds. Further, past studies have focused on the “built” elements of the environment, such as  land_use,
density, street connectivity, sidewalk/bike lane availability, and traffic/crime conditions. The associations
between “natural” environment factors and children’s ATS have not been sufficiently examined.

Given the noted limitations in previous studies on environment correlates of ATS, this study focuses on the
following two research questions:
(1) Do the relationships between distance and the odds of ATS vary across different distance
ranges/thresholds (≤800m, 800.1 to ≤1600m, 1600.1 to ≤2400m, and >2400m)?
(2) What specific built and natural environment factors are associated with children’s ATS?
This cross-sectional study was carried out in Austin Independent School District (AISD) in Austin, Texas. A total of
3,314 parental surveys were collected in 2010 from 20 schools out of the 81 schools in AISD and their home
locations were geocoded. This study only used those who lived within 10 miles from school. The survey collected
the data on school travel mode, student gender, grade, free or reduced lunch program qualification (a proxy for
household income level), car ownership, and language mostly used at home. Whether a child walks or bicycles to
or from school was the main outcome (dichotomous variable), and the other personal factors were used as
confounders. Built and natural environment characteristics were measured by Geographic Information System
and Environment for Visualizing Images within 100 feet of home-to-school route buffer. Mixed-effects spline
regression model was used for the statistical analyses.
Results showed significant variations in the associations between the distance to school and ATS across different
distance ranges. The odds of ATS were 0.705 (p<0.001) at the ≤800-meter range, 0.797 (p<0.001) at 800.1 to
≤1600-meter range, 0.916 (p=0.002) at 800.1 to ≤1600-meter range, and 1.006 (p=0.222) at >2400-meter range.
This suggested that the distance to school had a stronger negative association with ATS at shorter distance
ranges, while its relationship was not significant beyond 2,400 meters (1.5 miles). Built environment correlates
of ATS included more bike lanes (OR=1.32, p=0.016), presence of intersected highways (OR=0.50, p=0.001),
higher number of crashes (OR=0.94, p=0.001), and presence of sex offenders (OR=1.38, p=0.044). Natural
environmental correlates of ATS included presence of park (OR=1.43, p=0.012), steep slope over 8.33% (OR=0.98,
p=0.003), and normalized difference vegetation index (OR=1.02, p=0.040).
Findings from this study suggest that the probability of ATS decreases with increased distance to school, and the
magnitude of distance-ATS relationship decreases dramatically after 1,600 meters (1 mile) and no significant
relationship is found beyond 2,400 meters (1.5 miles). This finding indicates the need for different intervention
strategies to promote ATS across different distance ranges and also for reducing the school bus service eligibility
from the current 2+ miles to 1-1.5 miles. Further, this study also confirms the previously documented role of
safety and reveals new findings related to the potential importance of parks and greeneries in promoting ATS.
References
 Sirard, J., Riner, W., McIver, K., Pate R., 2005. Physical activity and active commuting to elementary
school. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise. 37(12): 2062-2069.
 Heelan, K., Donnelly, J., Jacobsen, D., Mayo, M., Washburn, R., Greene, L., 2005. Active commuting to
and from school and BMI in elementary school children - preliminary data. Child Care Health and
Development. 31(3): 341-349.
 McDonald, N., 2007. Active Transportation to School: Trends Among U.S. Schoolchildren, 1969–2001.
American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 32(6): 509-516.
 Ogden, C., Carroll, M., Curtin, L., McDowell, M., Tabak, C., Flegal, K., 2006. Prevalence of overweight and
obesity in the United States, 1999-2004. Journal of the American Medical Association. 295(13): 15491555.
 McDonald, N., 2008. Children’s mode choice for the school trip: the role of distance and school location
in walking to school. Transportation. 35(1): 23-35.

Abstract Index #: 814
INTERSTATE-5 FREEWAY CONSTRUCTION AND ITS IMPACT ON THE SETTLEMENT PATTERN OF ASIAN
IMMIGRANTS IN CHINATOWN-INTERNATIONAL DISTRICT, SEATTLE, WA
Abstract System ID#: 1077
Poster

KIM, Jean [University of Washington] jeankim3@uw.edu
After World War II, in 1945, economic opportunities boosted urban populations and substantial movement of
diverse socio-economic groups had occurred in the United States. city started to be packed with residents and
city traffic was overwhelmed with limited road infrastructure. Traffic engineers in that time proposed a radical
(and a radically expensive) solution: building new networks of high-speed, multi-lane highways connecting
downtown with residential area (Eliot 1922). Ultimately, the Interstate Highway Act of 1956 and the Federal
Highway Trust Fund strengthened this solution.
In most city, the freeways were routinely routed through non-white neighborhood (Alan 1965) and the
massive scale of highway structures fragmented neighborhood boundaries. city like Miami and Atlanta forced
former residents to relocate and exacerbated the geographical segregation between African American and white
neighborhoods (Chudacoff 2005). In Seattle, during the 1960s, similar patterns were happening: Interstate-5
Freeway (I-5) significantly bisected Chinatown/ International District (CID) and forced residents and enterprises to
relocate. Prior to the I-5 construction, Seattle’s CID was a unique pan-Asian immigrant community comprised of
Chinatown, Japan Town (known as Nihonmachi), Little Manila, and other immigrant comminuty. The highway
construction neglected CID, and the City demolished buildings, and eliminated businesses and homes, which
further contributed to the overall deterioration of the area. In 1965, eventually, the I-5 construction began and
several years later, the Kingdome, a covered stadium at the south of downtown, was constructed (Gargiulo
1988). Moreover, the elevated multi-lane highway structure physically divided the Asian American comminuty
and destroyed existing settlement patterns. Therefore, the level of social relationship between Asian immigrants
also been affected by the highway construction.
The objective of this research is two-fold: (1) to examine the impact of I-5 construction on built environment of
CID; and (2) to examine how the impacted built environment influenced social interaction among Asian
immigrants. In order to find the missing pieces, this paper analyzed Sanborn Fire Insurance map, historical aerial
photo, planning documents, articles, and newspapers. The mapping analysis shows that the highway
development forced current business entrepreneurs, who were mostly Chinese Americans, to demolish (or
partially remodel) their properties. Moreover, the Kingdome construction and other planning projects in the
following years restricted the expansion of CID neighborhood and exacerbated the economic downturn of the
area during the 1970s. With regards to the impact on social environments, the settlement pattern of Japanese,
Chinese, and Filipinos residents were more segregated after the I-5 construction compared to the earlier years.
Further research on community networks and related-facilities, such as family associations (e.g., Tongs), could
provide better sense of measuring the effort of preserving the cultural identity of each race in CID.
The Chinatown/International District of today is a combination of the unique and old pan-Asian settlements of
the past. Future highway constructions and adjacent developments should respect the identity of CID to preserve
the historical environment of unique Seattle’s pan-Asian neighborhood.
References
 Eliot, Charles (1922). “The Influence of the Automobile on the Design of Park Roads.” Landscape
Architecture 13: 27.
 Altshuler, Alan (1965). “The City Planning Process: A political Analysis.” Cornell University Press: 339.
 Chudacoff, Howard and Smith, Judith (2005). “The Evolution of American Urban Society.” Pearson
Prentice Hall. (6th ed).
 Gargiulo, Maria (1988). “East of Occidental: the history of Seattle’s Chinatown.” Center for Asian
American Media: 24:52 (video media).

Abstract Index #: 815
BACK TO THE CITY? ARE MILLENNIALS FAVORING city OVER THE SUBURBS AND RURAL area, AND WHAT
DOES THIS MEAN FOR THE FUTURE OF TRAVEL?
Abstract System ID#: 1086

Individual Paper
TAYLOR, Brian [UCLA] btaylor@ucla.edu, presenting author, primary author
BLUMENBERG, Evelyn [University of California, Los Angeles] eblumenb@ucla.edu
BROWN, Anne [University of California, Los Angeles] aebrown0316@gmail.com
RALPH, Kelcie [University of California, Los Angeles] kmralph@g.ucla.edu
VOULGARIS, Carole [University of California, Los Angeles] caroleturley@ucla.edu
Recent research shows that Millennials—those who came of age in the new millennium—differ in many ways
from the youth who came before them. The Millennial Generation is more culturally and ethnically diverse,
urban, educated, and liberal; they are more likely to embrace multiple modes of self-expression; and, having
entered the work force during and following the Great Recession, they are more likely to have experienced
unemployment, underemployment, and their long-term consequences (Pew Research Center, 2010). Studies also
suggest that Millennials are increasingly disdainful of suburban, auto-oriented lifestyles and are moving—in
growing numbers—to urban environments that lower their environment footprints. Sixty-two percent of
Millennials prefer to live in mixed-used urban comminuty close to numerous and diverse activities—shopping,
restaurants, employment, and 40 percent plan to live in urban neighborhood (Belden Russonello Strategists LLC,
2013). Indeed some recent research suggests that many, though not all, of the nation’s largest and most
culturally vibrant city U.S. metropolitan area are attracting disproportionate shares of young, college educated
adults (Cortright, 2011).
Against this backdrop, we draw on data from the 2000 and 2010 U.S. Census to examine the recent residential
location patterns of Millennials vis-à-vis other working-age adults. To comprehensively characterize residential
location, we develop a typology of neighborhood types utilizing the environment Protection Agency’s Smart
Location Database and data from the U.S. Census. Using factor and then cluster analysis, we categorize each
census tract in the United States (over 70,000 in all) into mutually exclusive neighborhood types. We then use our
two time periods (2000 and 2010) to examine lifecycle effects through a pseudo-cohort analysis. As young adults
age (in this case, over a 10-year period), do we see evidence in a shift in residential locations toward or away
from more urban, walkable, and transit-rich neighborhood?
The findings from this study have obvious implications for the future of city and suburbs generally, and the
revitalization of central city in particular. More specifically, such trends may support the efforts by
transportation planners to encourage travel by less environmently invasive modes like walking, biking, and
public transit. Such non-auto modes function best in dense urban neighborhood where origins and destinations
are proximate, and private vehicles function less effectively. Thus youth who move to and stay in urban
neighborhoods may be more likely than previous generations to adopt and maintain less auto-dependent
lifestyles.
References
 Cortright, Joseph (2005). The Young and Restless in a Knowledge Economy. Washington, DC: CEOs for
Cities.
 Moos, M. (2014) “Generationed” space: Societal restructuring and young adults’ changing location
patterns. The Canadian Geographer, 58(1), 11-33.
 Owens, Ann (2012). “Neighborhoods on the Rise: A Typology of neighborhood Experiencing
Socioeconomic Ascent,” City & Community, 11(4): 345-369.
 Pew Research Center (2010). Millennials. A Portrait of Generation Next. Confident. Connected. Open to
Change. Washington, DC: Pew Research Center, February.
 Sanchez, T. W., & Dawkins, C. J. (2001). Distinguishing city and suburban movers: evidence from the
American housing survey. Housing policy debate, 12(3), 607-631.

Abstract Index #: 816
AN INVESTIGATION OF CONTRIBUTING FACTORS OF PEDESTRIAN FATAL CRASHES ON INTERSTATE HIGHWAYS
USING A HIERARCHICAL SPATIAL AUTOREGRESSIVE MODEL

Abstract System ID#: 1089
Individual Paper
ZHONG, Haotian [Texas A&M University] haotianzhong@gmail.com
Pedestrian fatal crashes on the Interstate System account for more than 10 percent of total pedestrian crashes in
the U.S. over the five-year period of 2008 through 2012. This number is highly alarming, considering the fact that
the Interstate System only accounts for 1 percent of the total public road mileage in the U.S. and pedestrians are
not expected on the Interstate System. There are a few pieces of literature that have made efforts in improving
this situation. However, these studies do not consider the effect of the built environment or the co-dependence
of different geographical levels of built environment features on pedestrian crashes on interstate highways. This
study employs a hierarchical spatial autoregressive model (HSAR) to accommodate the geographically
hierarchical data structure of crash incidents. This study will utilize the principal component analysis to create
sprawl index from five underlying  land_use characteristics, which represents the regional level in the model. Using
GIS software package, the author assesses the urban form of the community, which represents the neighborhood
level in the model, as well as on-site safety countermeasures, which represent the micro-scale environment in
the model. Using the HSAR model will allow the author to estimate the co-dependence of different built
environment features at these three geographical levels contributing to pedestrian crashes and their magnitudes.
The findings suggest  land_use, urban form and engineering countermeasures on site all contribute to the
pedestrian fatal crashes on Interstate Highways. The co-dependence among the factors at three different
geographical levels suggests planning cooperation among planning departments at State level, regional level and
municipal level And it also provide evidence for splitting the funding for transportation safety based on the
magnitudes.
References
 Ewing, R., & Cervero, R. (2010). Travel and the built environment. Journal of the American Planning
Association, 76(3), 265-294.
 Johnson, C. D. (1997). Pedestrian fatalities on interstate highways: characteristics and countermeasures.
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 1578(1), 23-29.
 Dong, G., & Harris, R. (2014). Spatial Autoregressive Models for Geographically Hierarchical Data
Structures. Geographical Analysis.
 Mohamed, R., vom Hofe, R., & Mazumder, S. (2014). Jurisdictional spillover effects of sprawl on injuries
and fatalities. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 72(0), 9-16.

Abstract Index #: 817
TRANSIT ACCESSIBILITY AND EQUITY
Abstract System ID#: 1099
Individual Paper
TILAHUN, Nebiyou [University of Illinois at Chicago] ntilahun@uic.edu
Accessibility refers to the ease with which one can reach destinations or opportunities. There are different
reasons to study accessibility. Several authors have looked at its connection to labor market outcomes. Though
evidence is mixed, many have found some aspects of accessibility to be related with employment outcomes (e.g.
Sanchez (1998); Berechman and Paaswell (2001); Kawabata (2003); Ozbay et al. (2006)), with reduced welfare
usage (e.g. Blumenberg and Ong (1998)), with differences in employment rates (e.g. Ihlanfeldt and Sjoquist
(1990); Ihlanfeldt (2006)). Another reason to study accessibility is the view that it is not mobility per se that
should be the focus of transportation policy but the activities that can be reached using the transportation
system. The view of travel as a derived demand is consistent with this view. Policy thus should focus on
connecting users to opportunities they value rather than focusing on the mobility aspects of travel alone. This
forces us to think about not just the transportation system, but also about  land_use and how the two work in
tandem.

In this study I particularly focus on public transit system accessibility. Public transit serves in part the role of
addressing mobility inequities in many urban area. Low income persons or households without vehicles, persons
who can not operate personal vehicles due to disability or other reasons, are often reliant on transit system for
their daily travel needs. Beyond the availability of transit service in close proximity to those that experience these
challenges (e.g. whether a neighborhood is served by a bus), an important metric of how successfully transit
systems are meeting the goal of equitable access is to evaluate where these system can take users within
reasonable time. In this paper I evaluate transit accessibility in the Chicago region to a set of activities including to
work, groceries and park spaces and assess the level of connectivity the transit system provides different groups
of residents. The study assesses how transit access is distributed across space in different parts of the
metropolitan area, and across different income, socio demographic groups (age, race, education level) and by
disability status. The study will also use a variety of access measures within those reported above particularly for
employment access. Access to low/medium/and high wage jobs will be assessed separately as will classes of jobs
based on industrial classification. This is done to recognize that not all opportunities may be of value to different
groups based on skill levels. Data for the study comes from recent efforts by the author to map accessibility in
the Chicago region (urbanaccessibility.com) and publicly available census data, which will provide the socio
demographic dimension. The goal is to evaluate the distribution of transit access as it exists and to assess
whether redistribution through changes to the transit system or through  land_use changes is in order to address
existing gaps. Implications of the findings will also be discussed.
References
 Berechman, J. and R. Paaswell (2001). Accessibility improvements and local employment: an empirical
analysis. Journal of transportation and statistics 4 (3).
 Blumenberg, E. and P. Ong (1998). Job accessibility and welfare usage: Evidence from Los Angeles.
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 17 (4), 639–657.
 Ihlanfeldt, K. R. and D. L. Sjoquist (1990). Job accessibility and racial differences in youth employment
rates. The American economic review, 267–276.
 Kawabata, M. (2003). Job access and employment among low-skilled autoless workers in us
metropolitan area. Environment and Planning A 35(9), 1651–1668.
 Ozbay, K., D. Ozmen, and J. Berechman (2006). Modeling and analysis of the link between accessibility
and employment growth. Journal of Transportation Engineering 132(5), 385–393.

Abstract Index #: 818
SAFETY IN NUMBERS FOR PEDESTRIANS AND CYCLISTS? NEW EVIDENCE FROM CALIFORNIA
Abstract System ID#: 1113
Individual Paper
SALON, Deborah [Arizona State University] Deborah.Salon@asu.edu
First proposed by Jacobsen in 2003, the “safety in numbers” hypothesis suggests that walking and bicycling
become safer as larger numbers of people walk and bike. Jacobsen’s original article has been cited more than 500
times in the scholarly literature, with countless additional citations in the popular press and the blogosphere. The
implication of this result is extremely attractive – and dangerous: if we just get more pedestrians and cyclists on
the streets, the streets will become safer for pedestrians and cyclists!
This study uses new, census tract-level estimates of bicycling and walking activity from California together with
10 years of tract-level crash data to conduct an in-depth exploration of the safety in numbers hypothesis. I
estimate the relationship between walking/cycling activity and walking/cycling crashes at multiple levels of
geographic aggregation – census tract, city, county, and metropolitan region – and for different crash severity
levels, and discuss differences in the findings. I explore differences in these relationships by neighborhood
typology (i.e. central city, urban, suburb, rural), as well as look at walking/cycling activity normalized by roadway
length to get an indicator of the density of pedestrians and cyclists rather than simply the number of pedestrians
and cyclists on the roads.

Preliminary results highlight three points. First, the level of geographic aggregation is critical to the safety in
numbers result. Interestingly, the iconic relationship appears stronger at finer geographic resolution. Second, the
relationship between crash rates and density of pedestrians and cyclists is different from the relationship
between crash rates and numbers of pedestrians and cyclists. Third, specification of crash severity is important.
Crashes that result in severe injury or death have a different relationship with pedestrian and cyclist activity
levels than crashes that result in minor injury.
Understanding the nuances of these relationships will allow planners and decision makers to better assess under
what conditions the "safety in numbers" hypothesis might - or might not - be relevant.
References
 Jacobsen, P. L. (2003). Safety in numbers: more walkers and bicyclists, safer walking and bicycling. Injury
prevention, 9(3), 205-209.
 Bhatia, R., & Wier, M. (2011). “Safety in Numbers” re-examined: Can we make valid or practical
inferences from available evidence?. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 43(1), 235-240.
 Geyer, J., Raford, N., Ragland, D., & Pham, T. (2006). The Continuing Debate about "Safety in Numbers"
Data from Oakland, CA. Presented at the 2006 Transportation Research Board Annual Meeting,
Washington, D.C.

Abstract Index #: 819
A FAIR DISTRIBUTION OF TRANSPORTATION BENEFITS: INTERPRETING CIVIL RIGHTS REGULATIONS FOR
TRANSPORTATION INVESTMENT program
Abstract System ID#: 1124
Individual Paper
GOLUB, Aaron [Arizona State Unversity] aaron.golub@asu.edu, presenting author
MARTENS, Karel [Radboud University Nijmegen] k.martens@fm.ru.nl, primary author
Planners have long grappled with understanding and improving the fairness of planning processes, plans, and
planning outcomes. Within the transportation planning arena, the incorporation of social equity concerns into
transportation planning has a long history in the United and while its roots can easily be traced back to the Civil
Rights Movement and the later passage of the Civil Rights Act in 1964 and the environment Justice (EJ) Order
12898 (1994), its translation into specific guidelines has taken a number of steps. These guidelines address three
main concerns: the participation of groups traditionally marginalized in the planning process, the distribution of
externalities of transportation system, and the distribution of the costs and benefits of transportation
investments and policy among various comminuty.
In this paper, we aim to clarify the meaning of these guidelines for the assessment of the distribution of one
particular type of benefit, access. We define access here as the ease with which a person can reach destinations
from a given location in space (Handy and Niemeier, 1997) which can be argued, is of special importance from an
equity perspective, as it is a pre-condition for participating in life-enhancing opportunities, such as employment,
education, health care, and social networks (Lucas 2012). Indeed, the distribution of accessibility has been
covered extensively in the literature (Shen, 1998). The literature gives a rich understanding of the large
disparities in access levels experienced by different population groups. Few authors, however, use an explicitly
normative yardstick to assess whether the observed disparities in access are fair. In most cases, equality is used
implicitly as the standard of assessment, but without supporting arguments. Some authors do propose an explicit
normative standard (e.g., Schweitzer and Taylor 2008), but few have done so in relation to accessibility (see
Martens et al. 2012). Similarly, the civil rights guidance generally fails to provide a clear standard for assessing the
distribution of access.
In this paper, we aim to clarify the meaning of Title VI and EJ regulations for the assessment of the distribution of
access from regional transportation plans, and then investigate these assessments in practice. We start with a
discussion of the legal requirements for incorporating equity in transportation planning. We are especially

interested in the assessment of the  impact of regional transportation plans consisting of a number of capital
investments given the likely impact of these plans on access levels across population groups. We find that existing
guidelines provide little explicit guidance regarding the assessment of the distribution of benefits generated by
such transportation investment plans. Based on different interpretations of Title VI, however, we distinguish four
possible normative standards: (1) only explicitly discriminatory actions are problematic, (2) a Pareto-type
interpretation where some non-zero benefits should be granted to protected comminuty, (3) benefits reaped
by (protected) comminuty should be proportional to their size, and (4) a restorative approach, in which benefits
should be distributed in favor of protected comminuty to reduce existing inequalities over time. Using these
four normative approaches, we analyze the equity analyses carried out by the ten largest metropolitan planning
organizations (MPOs) as part of developing a regional transportation plan (RTP). Using content analysis to code
analyses into different normative types, we assess the way in which access is being defined and the normative
standards that are used to assess the fairness of its distribution. Our research uncovers a confusing diversity of
analyses and underlying distributional standards. We argue that explicit federal guidance regarding equity
standards is a prerequisite for improving the fairness of practice across the board. Transportation planning
agencies can lead the way by engaging explicitly with the meaning of equity as part of their ex ante equity
assessment process of regional transportation plans.
References
 Handy, S. L. and D. A. Niemeier (1997). "Measuring accessibility: An exploration of issues and
alternatives." Environment and Planning A, 29(7): 1175-1194
 Lucas, K. (2012). "Transport and social exclusion: Where are we now?" transportation Policy 20: 105-113.
 Martens, K., Golub, A., Robinson, G., (2012). “A justice-theoretic approach to the distribution of
transportation benefits: Implications for transportation planning practice in the United States.”
Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 46(2): 684-695.
 Shen, Q. (1998). "Location characteristics of inner-city neighborhood and employment accessibility of
low-wage workers." Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 25(3): 345-365.

Abstract Index #: 820
TRAFFIC CRASH ANALYSIS OF OLDER DRIVERS: FOCUS ON THE EFFECT OF URBAN FORM CHARACTERISTICS
Abstract System ID#: 1134
Individual Paper
BEJLERI, Ilir [University of Florida] ilir@ufl.edu, presenting author, primary author
HAKIM, Nahal [University of Florida] nahalhakim@ufl.edu
The right of living a healthy life and plan a city to deliver that right is one of the urban_planning goals. Many
planners around the world are making significant efforts to lessen threats to people’s mental, social, and physical
health. One significant measurable threat is the number of unintentional fatalities. Motor vehicle crash is the
second leading cause of unintentional death in the United States (Center for Disease Control and prevention,
2013). Vulnerable road users have recently received a special attention in crash analysis literature. In Florida,
with the largest percentage of old population statewide (18.7% according to 2013 Census data), older drivers (age
65+) should be considered as the vulnerable users as they have the higher chance of getting seriously injured.
This age group is up to four times more susceptible to die in a crash with same intensity compared to a 20 year
old driver (Eberhard, 1996).
The dominant pattern of age-related crash analysis is constructed based on the association between young
drivers and transportation related factors. It reveals the gap in studies for older drivers’ crashes and its
relationship to urban form-related factors. Many studies have focused on the effect of speed and vehicle mile
travel (VMT) on crashes, with this assumption that specific types of  land_use and urban form that affect the
speed, generate more trips and increase VMT (Ewing & Dumbaugh,2009). However, few studies have explored
the direct and in-depth association between urban form and vehicle crashes.

This research seeks to contribute to filling the current gap by exploring urban form factors contributing to crash
frequency and crash severity for older drivers in Florida. Three main questions are examined: first, is there a
significant association between crash frequencies/severities and the age of drivers in Florida? Second, how does
this association vary within the state? Third, what are the main urban form factors contributing to older driver
crashes? To answer the first and third questions, the study applies multiple regression and discrete choice models
to explore crash contributing factors and estimate crash probabilities. For the second question, the application of
geographic weighted regression explains the spatial differences and the higher priority area in case of older
driver’s safety.
The findings from this study — by determining both the high risk urban form factors and hot spot crash area
involving older drivers — can guide transportation planners to establish effective countermeasures in the process
of crash reduction policy.
References
 Austin, R. A., & Faigin, B. M. (2003). Effect of vehicle and crash factors on older occupants. Journal of
Safety Research, 34(4), 441-452.
 Eberhard, J. W. (1996). Safe mobility for senior citizens. IATSS Research, 20 (1), 29–37
 Ewing, R., & Dumbaugh, E. (2009). The built environment and traffic safety a review of empirical
evidence. Journal of Planning Literature, 23(4), 347-367.
 Huang, H., Abdel-Aty, M. A., & Darwiche, A. L. (2010). County-level crash risk analysis in Florida.
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2148(1), 27-37.
 Khattak, A. J., Pawlovich, M. D., Souleyrette, R. R., & Hallmark, S. L. (2002). Factors related to more
severe older driver traffic crash injuries. Journal of Transportation Engineering, 128(3), 243-249.

Abstract Index #: 821
THE CAUSAL  impact OF URBAN PLANS: THE CASE OF TRANSIT-ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT
Abstract System ID#: 1144
Individual Paper
MILLARD-BALL, Adam [University of California, Santa Cruz] adammb@ucsc.edu
Implicit in the idea of urban_planning is that by drawing up and implementing a plan, a community can influence
its destiny. To date, however, there is almost no empirical research that examines the causal  impact of plans.
Instead, scholars have asked whether plans are implemented (Talen, 1996) or whether development conforms to
a plan. Implementation or conformance, however, do not equate to a causal relationship, as plans may be
endogenous. For example, a plan that calls for high-rise development in downtown Dallas may simply document
preferences that would have been realized regardless of the plan.
In this paper, I use the case of transit-oriented development (TOD) plans to provide quantitative estimates of the
impact of TOD planning on urban development. I focus on one plan in San Francisco (the Market/Octavia Plan),
and eight plans in Seattle completed under the City’s Station Area Planning program.
TOD plans have two characteristics that make them an excellent case study. First, they address physical changes
to the built environment such as densities and parking ratios, which can be readily quantified. One might also
expect plans that focus on physical development rather than policy changes to have a greater causal role, as they
may provide a coordination mechanism for developers and local government (Hopkins, 2001).
Second, the boundaries of TOD plans (at least in San Francisco and Seattle) are arbitrary, extending 1/4 or 1/2
mile from rail transit rather than following physical or socio-economic boundaries. Certainly, transit mode share
declines with distance from transit, but there is nothing magical about the 1/4- and 1/2-mile thresholds (Guerra
et al. 2012). This arbitrary spatial extent allows me to use a regression discontinuity design to compare parcels
and developments immediately inside and immediately outside the plan area, on the assumption that the
distinguishing feature is the existence of the plan. In other words, I assume that the TOD plan accounts for any

differences between nearby parcels on either side of the plan boundary, after controlling for distance to transit.
Such regression discontinuity designs are well established in the causal inference literature in disciplines such as
economics and political science, and increasingly in planning as well.
Seattle and San Francisco have a long history of TOD planning, giving time for any  impact of a plan to be felt.
Seattle’s program was completed in 2001. San Francisco’s Market/Octavia Plan was adopted in 2008. Data
availability is a further consideration. I have already obtained parcel-level development data and GIS files, and I
have cleaned and joined the San Francisco data.
I will quantitatively assess the  impact of TOD plans on several outcome variables: (i) the probability of
redevelopment occurring on a given parcel; and (ii) development characteristics that TOD plans seek to influence,
e.g. density and parking ratios. Additional control variables, such as development data and the ratio of land value
to improvements value, are straightforward to compute from the parcel data.
The primary focus in this paper is the quantitative analysis. However, I expect the results to inform future
qualitative study, through interviews with planners, developers, residents and others involved in the planning
process. Such a qualitative follow-up would enable me to explore the motivations and processes underlying the
quantitative results.
The findings will be of interest to scholars and practitioners in the fields of TOD and station-area planning.
Understanding the extent to which TOD planning leads to more and/or denser housing will help to assess the
cost-effectiveness of such a strategy in building transit ridership. For example, an MPO or transit agency might
consider giving planning grants to local jurisdictions, as exemplified in the San Francisco Bay Area. This paper will
also contribute to broader questions of planning theory, helping to move the debate beyond whether plans are
implemented and towards an understanding of their causal impact on policy and development.
References
 Talen, E., 1996. Do plans get implemented? A review of evaluation Talen, E., 1996, Do plans get
implemented? A review of evaluation in planning. J. Plan. Lit. 10: 248-259.
 Hopkins, L.D., 2001. Urban development: The logic of making plans. Island Press, Washington, DC.
 Millard-Ball, A., 2013. The Limits to Planning. Causal  impact of city climate plans. J. Plan. Educ. Res. 33,
5–19.
 Guerra, E., Cervero, R., Tischler, D., 2012. Half-Mile Circle: Does It Best Represent Transit Station
Catchments? Transp. Res. Rec. 2276, 101–109.

Abstract Index #: 822
MEASURING TRANSPORTATION INEQUALITY
Abstract System ID#: 1154
Poster
SEHATZADEH, Bahareh [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] sehatzadeh@gmail.com
Historically transportation planning in the United States has focused on promoting mobility as its central
principle. Extensive investment in highways and roads and promoting car as the centerpiece of the American
Dream have created hypermobile comminuty. Benefits of mobility have environment costs as well as social
costs. High mobility levels cause disadvantaged individuals who are financially, culturally or physically restrained
in increasing their mobility patterns to become even more disadvantaged (Handy, 2005). Transportation system
can provide some with high levels of mobility and freedom while preventing others from accessing essential
activities to fully engage in society. Therefore transportation planners need to not only focus on mobility but also
take into consideration the social context of transportation. There are currently not adequate measures to
address social issues including transportation inequality. The FHWA is developing guidance on new performance
measures to evaluate the impact of transportation funding given to the states, and among this will be measures

of social disparity. The main objective of this study is to develop a set of measures and indices that assist in
evaluating and studying transportation inequality with an application in Los Angeles County.
Transportation inequality is a concept with many components. It can refer to the unfair distribution of costs and
benefits of transportation system including but not limited to governmental subsidies in favor of private vehicles
versus transit; unfair burden of transportation projects on low income and minority comminuty through the
disparate distribution of traffic externalities; and, unequal participation of comminuty in decision making
processes, among others. Unequal access is also an important part of the inequality problem mainly because it
can exacerbate social exclusion. transportation related social exclusion is defined as the process by which people are
prevented from participating in the economic, political and social life of the community because of reduced
accessibility to opportunities, services and social networks. In the United States, concerns about providing equal
access to social and economic opportunities has mostly centered on the issue of access to employment, health
care, and food (Hansen, 1959; Blumenberg & Ong, 2001; Guagliardo et al., 2004; Walker et al., 2010). The main
gap in the existing literature, however, is the lack of multidimensional indicators of accessibility from a social
exclusion point of view and indices to measure unequal distribution of these indicators across comminuty. This
is the focus of this paper.
This paper is organized in 2 sections. The first section is dedicated to developing a set of indices of transportation
inequality. Statistical correlation studies and GIS tools are utilized in this step to develop alternative composite
indices to measure access and how it is distributed across different population groups. The second section tests
developed indices in evaluating policy. To do so the County of Los Angeles is selected as a case study before and
after implementation of Measure R projects. Measure R is a half-cent sales tax for Los Angeles County to finance
new transportation projects and program, and accelerate those already in the pipeline. Primary sources of data
utilized in this study include Bureau of the Census, American FactFinder, Census TIGER ﬁles, Census
Transportation Planning Package, Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics, OpenStreetMap, California
Household Travel Survey, Metro’s Official Blog of Transit Data and Technology, SCAG GIS library, and
GoogleTransitDataFeed.
I expect to have a set of inequality indices at the end of this research that can expose strengths and weaknesses
of a policy such as Measure R in alleviating transportation inequality and social exclusion. These multidimensional
indices can highlight which area of the county do not have sufficient access or which services are not accessible
enough yet. This will help planners and policy makers to recognize area in need of further attention and guide
funding priorities.
References
 Blumenberg, E., & Ong, P. (2001). Cars, Buses, and Jobs: Welfare Participants and Employment Access in
Los Angeles. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 1756(1),
22-31.
 Guagliardo, M. F. (2004). Spatial Accessibility of Primary Care: Concepts, Methods and Challenges.
International Journal of Health Geographics, 3(1), 3.
 Handy, S. L. (2005). Planning for Accessibility: In Theory and in Practice. K. Krizek, D. Levinson (Eds.),
Access to Destinations, Elsevier, Oxford, 2005.
 Hansen, W.G. (1959). How Accessibility Shapes  land_use. Journal of the American Planning Institute,
Vol. 25, pp. 73-76.
 Walker, R. E., Keane, C. R., & Burke, J. G. (2010). Disparities and Access to Healthy Food in the United
States: A Review of Food Deserts Literature. Health & place, 16(5), 876-884.

Abstract Index #: 823
PUBLIC TRANSIT IN A NON-TRADITIONAL MARKET: THE CASE OF WESTFIELD, MA
Abstract System ID#: 1176
Individual Paper
NEOG, DRISTI [Westfield State University] neog.dristi@gmail.com

The vision of sustainable development can become a reality only if all citizens are given access to options that
enable them to conduct their activities in a ways that are sustainable. Often, we are aware of how our lifestyles
produce undesirable consequences and would like to change that, but are unable to because of lack of
alternatives that can support our activities without associated negative externalities. This is especially true in the
case of our travel habits and decisions. Most of us are aware of the ills of using the private automobile as a
dominant mode, and may need just a little encouragement to change our mode of everyday travel. Transit, some
may say, is a worthy opponent of the car, with similar benefits, but with a smaller ecological footprint and
suitability for a newer generation who would rather use their smartphones and devices than drive. As promising
as transit sounds, especially given its success with increasing ridership trends and investments in multitude of
modes (APTA Factbook 2014), a huge number of city in the U.S. do not have transit services available to its
citizens.
This paper directs attention to one such city that fits into the description of a non-traditional transit market, the
city of Westfield, MA, lacking the necessary physical and geographic contexts such as densities and compact
forms deemed essential for successful transit operations. Westfield, MA, has a population of only 41,094 (U.S
Census 2010). However, since it is home to a university campus and boasts of scenic landscapes and the
Westfield River that could be potential tourist destinations in the future, and hence there might be some latent
transit demand. In addition, its proximity to transit friendly city of Boston and bustling Worcester makes it a case
worth discussing in terms of transit. Given that some research exemplify successful transit trends and foresee
such performances in similar comminuty elsewhere (Thompson et al 2006, Mees 2010), this study examines if
there is scope for broadening citizen travel choices here or give up the impossible task of inducing public transit.
This paper highlights the lessons from an exhaustive literate review that explores the external and internal
factors that affect transit and identifies factors contributing to successful transit system. Using Westfield as an
example, the paper will then present a detailed review of the city, including socio-demographics and geospatial
analysis (GIS), illustrating how the lessons learned from successful transit system/cities can be used to carve out
possible transit strategies for meeting mobility challenges of citizens of Westfield and such non-traditional transit
markets.
References
 APTA Factbook (2014). 2014 Public Transportation Factbook, 65th Edition, November 2014, Published by
American Public Transportation Association
 Mees, Paul (2010), transportation for Suburbia. Beyond the Automobile Age, 2010. Published by Earthscan.
London
 Thompson, G. L., J. R. Brown, R. Sharma, and S. Scheib (2006). Where Transit Is Growing: Surprising
Results. Journal of Public Transportation, Vol 9, No 2, 2006.

Abstract Index #: 824
THE TRANSIT EQUITY IN RICHMOND, VIRGINIA: AN ASSESSMENT
Abstract System ID#: 1190
Individual Paper
CHEN, Xueming [Virginia Commonwealth University] xchen2@vcu.edu
Transit equity is a critically important but very complicated issue, which can be examined on multiple dimensions
and in different ways. Even though there exists a trade-off between transit efficiency and transit equity from a
purely economic perspective, transit equity itself has a civil and human rights priority that can never be
neglected.
This fact certainly holds true for Richmond, Virginia. Richmond is a relatively poor city with a lower median
household income and a higher concentration of African American population, many of whom are transit
captives. The Greater Richmond Transit Company (GRTC), which is the sole local transit operator primarily
providing bus services, is facing huge challenges to meeting an ever-rising transit demand throughout the region.

This paper will assess the following transit equity-related issues in Richmond, Virginia:
First, transit accessibility to employment issue. Transit accessibility, employment, and poverty are inherently
connected. Many low-income residents heavily rely on transit to access their job locations. However, due to low
population density and fiscal consideration, most of GRTC’s transit services are primarily concentrated within the
boundary of Richmond city, even though jobs have been suburbanized. Inability to access employment has
worsened the urban poverty situation.
Second, population aging and paratransit service issue. Richmond has entered the aging society, just like the rest
of nation. Many senior citizens cannot drive and quite a few of them even cannot take fixed route buses.
Pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, GRTC is obligated to provide extremely expensive
paratransit services to these people. However, GRTC is fiscally distressed to do that. Therefore, many innovative
financing and planning strategies need to be figured out in order to meet this challenge.
Third, Title VI compliance issue. Even though GRTC periodically prepares its transit system Title VI program and
monitors its progress, the existing evaluation system and performance indicators still leave some loopholes. This
paper will focus on examining its service and fare equity issues, while other relevant issues may also be touched.
Based on this empirical study, the paper will draw conclusions and make recommendations.
References
 Cervero, R. B., Wachs, M., Berlin, R., and Gephart, R. J. 1980. Efficiency and Equity Implications of
Alternative Transit Fare policy. UMTA-CA-11-0019-80-1 Final Report, University of California, Los
Angeles and Urban Mass Transportation Administration.
 Garrett, M. and Taylor, B. 1999. Reconsidering Social Equity in Public Transit. Berkeley Planning Journal,
13: 6-27.
 Grengs, J. 2002. Community-Based Planning as a Source of Political Change: The Transit Equity
Movement of Los Angeles' Bus Riders Union. Journal of the American Planning Association, 68(2): 165178.
 Hodge, D. C. 1988. Fiscal Equity in Urban Mass Transit system: A Geographic Analysis. Annals of the
Association of American Geographers, 78(2): 288–306.
 Ircha, M. and Gallagher, M. 1985. Urban Transit: Equity Aspects. Journal of urban_planning and
Development, 111(1): 1–9.

Abstract Index #: 825
PROSPECTIVE ACCESSIBILITY EVALUATION AT THE PROJECT LEVEL
Abstract System ID#: 1200
Individual Paper
LEVINE, Jonathan [University of Michigan] jnthnlvn@umich.edu, presenting author, primary author
MERLIN, Louis [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] louismerlin@gmail.com
GRENGS, Joe [University of Michigan] grengs@umich.edu
Accessibility metrics in current use are, for the most part, either snapshots of people’s ability to reach
destinations today, or of that ability under future regional development scenarios. These metrics are strong in
evaluative comparison of geographic, demographic, or modal accessibility distributions within or between
regions. But for accessibility-based evaluation to displace its mobility counterpart in land-use and transportation
planning, accessibility tools need to be 1) forward looking; and 2) deployed at the level of the individual project
or regulatory decision. For example, where a transportation investment is currently evaluated by its potential
impact on highway level of service, the planner would need to forecast its accessibility impact. A similar move
would need to occur with land-use regulatory decisions: where a development proposal is currently evaluated in

part by traffic-impact analysis—a strictly mobility-based framework—the planner would need to evaluate land_use proposals for their future impact on accessibility.
A move from whole-region metrics to forward-looking project-based metrics involves unsolved methodological
challenges. Consider, for example, a new housing development in a close-in area of a metropolitan region. It
might degrade the accessibility of some existing residents by exacerbating congestion without contributing
compensating non-residential destinations. Accessibility of the neighborhood’s future residents would
presumably be a compensating factor, but the basis of comparison for this benefit is not obvious. Neither the
current residential locations of these future residents nor their hypothetical alternative residential locations
(should the neighborhood not develop) are known. This paper argues that this problem can be solved with an
accessibility elasticity metric: the ratio of percent change in regional accessibility to percent change in population
(in the case of residential development), indicators of destination value (in the case of nonresidential), or
infrastructure metrics (in the case of transportation investment). Properties of this framework are explored and
implications analyzed through development of a framework for prospective project-level accessibility evaluation
and demonstration of the accessibility elasticity metric over a range of cases.
References
 Levine, Jonathan, Joe Grengs, Qingyun Shen, and Qing Shen. (2012). Does Accessibility Require Density
or Speed? A Comparison of Fast versus Close in Getting Where you Want to Go in U.S. Metropolitan
Areas. Journal of the American Planning Association 78(2):157-172.
 Grengs, Joe, Jonathan Levine, Qing Shen, and Qingyun Shen. (2010). Intermetropolitan Comparison of
Transportation Accessibility: Sorting Out Mobility and Proximity in San Francisco and Washington, DC.
Journal of Planning Education and Research, 29(4), 427-443.
 Merlin, Louis (2014). Measuring Community Completeness: Jobs-Housing Balance, Accessibility, and
Convenient Access to Non-Work Destinations. Environment and Planning B, 41(4):736-756.

Abstract Index #: 826
FLICKRS AND GREENWAYS: GAUGING DEMAND FOR MULTIUSE TRAILS WITH SOCIAL MEDIA
Abstract System ID#: 1207
Individual Paper
LINDSEY, Greg [University of Minnesota] linds301@umn.edu, presenting author, primary author
PETERKA, Michael [University of Minnesota] pete3405@umn.edu
Background: Researchers are exploring the use of social media to gauge the use of, or demand for, different types
of public facilities and infrastructure, particularly transportation networks and recreational facilities that are
dispersed or provide open, unrestricted access. Challenges in these applications are technological (e.g., how to
access and capture data), analytical (e.g., how to deal with non-random samples), and ethical (e.g., how to
address the digital divide and exclusion of poor or aged in samples). Studies of the feasibility of using social media
in recreational facility planning and management are needed.
Aims and Hypotheses: Our general aim is to assess the feasibility of using social media to gauge demand for
urban multiuse trails. Our specific aim is to assess the potential for using counts of users who upload photos to
FLICKr trails in Minneapolis as an indicator of trail traffic. We hypothesize that counts of users will be correlated
with measures of trail traffic.
Approach and Methods: We measure trail traffic using active infrared monitors on an 80-mile trail network in
Minneapolis. Using factors derived from counts at six permanent monitoring locations, we extrapolate counts
form short-duration samples (> one week) on each segment (mean length = + one mile) to estimate annual
average daily trail traffic (AADTT) for each segment. Using GIS, we buffer the trail network and extract from Flickr
databases counts of individuals within the buffers who upload photos to Flickr. We define a person-user day
(PUD) as the number of unique people on a given date who upload images from a specific trail segment. For an

entire year, person-user days is the sum of all daily PUDs, or the number of unique person-date combinations
throughout the year.
Results: Preliminary analyses show that ratios of AADTT to PUD vary greatly across trail segments. However,
mapping and statistical analyses show correlation between the trail segment AADTTs and PUDs. Both measures
are highest on trail segments near water bodies in parks. Other factors associated with variation include
neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics.
Implications for Planning: Social media may be useful in gauging demand for trails and other public facilities, but
challenges in application remain. As a general indicator of intensity of use, PUDs provide insight into spatial
patterns of use of large networks. Where detailed information is needed for purposes of planning or engineering
(e.g., to plan traffic controls), counts remain necessary. A limitation of the use of PUDs as an indicator of demand
for facilities is that populations uploading images to Flickr are not likely to be representative of the general
population. Multiple measures of demand for facilities are needed to ensure interests of all users are addressed.
References
 Hankey, S., Lindsey, G., and Marshall, J. (2014). “Day-of-Year Scaling Factors and Design Considerations
for Non-motorized Traffic Monitoring program.” Transportation Research Record. Journal of the
Transportation Research Board.
 Flickr, 2014. Flickr API Guide, URL https://www.flickr.com/services/api/flickr.photos.search.html
(accessed October 2014).
 Wood, S.A., Guerry, A.D., Silver, J.M., Lacayo, M., 2013. Using social media to quantifynature-based
tourism and recreation. Sci. Rep. 3, 2976.

Abstract Index #: 827
CAUSAL FACTORS SHAPING POLICY INTERVENTION BASED ON THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE MARKET AND
STATE THROUGH UBER
Abstract System ID#: 1208
Individual Paper
KIM, Youngjun [University of Illinois at Chicago] youngjunkim84@gmail.com, presenting author, primary author
KIM, Minsoo [Kyungsung University] mskimurban@naver.com
This study examines how different municipal governments regulate the informal economy (sharing economy) and
what is the purpose of regulation, and what factors influence these regulatory outcomes. Uber, which is one of
the most well-known cases of informal and sharing economy, has been the focus of conflicts over regulation
around the world.. The relationship between the informal economy and the state is one of inevitable conflict
(Centeno and Portes, 2006). As an example of informal economy, Uber works to avoid or to subvert state
authority. According to Centeno and Portes, the regulatory intent and the regulatory capacity formulate state
regulatory policy that target emerging entrepreneurs in the territory of informality. However, when I
investigate current discourse and regulation of Uber, this framework does not apply to the relationship between
Uber and the state. The state's regulatory role of risk management is not politically or socially neutral (Cross and
Pena, 2006). The recent regulatory framework of the state’s approach to Uber is related more to an existing
relationship between the state and the local taxi industry, and the unique characteristics of the taxi market.
The taxi industry is one of the few industries which are still regulated by the government, and have not been
opened up to the market as the primary mechanism of regulating services and prices (Teal and Berglund, 1987;
Schaller, 2007). Furthermore, the taxi as a transportation mode must now compete with subway and bus public
transit modes, but at the same time functions as a supplement to public transportation services. Therefore, the
relationship between the taxi and the local government has been defined by the taxi industry’s strong connection
with the public sector. This is a factor that has prevented taxi industry from being privatized or opened up to
market regulation.

This research uses three cases: the taxi market in Chicago, Tokyo, and Seoul, and recent municipal regulations
and actions against Uber in those places, as a comparative case study. The governments of these three city have
been controlling the controlled existing taxi industry through the driver’s permit system. However, their
regulatory framework and methods are now moving toward a different direction, with different initial outcomes.
Limited empirical data has been generated so far in this new research area, so I use existing literature and
journalistic content to fill this gap.
This paper has three aims. First, I will conceptualize the general local taxi industry in terms of its role, function,
and regulatory system. Second, this paper examines each municipal government regulatory policy against Uber to
understand how they are regulating this emerging economic activity. Lastly, I explore how this governmental
regulation has been formed by the relationship between local governments and the current local taxi industry.
This study suggests that the institutional nexus around the formal industry can affect the extent and methods of
regulating new informal economic actors, which may be compete with the existing formal industry. With a
globalized informal economy of multiple simultaneous phenomena, the regulatory framework and direction of
global city(like New York, Chicago, Tokyo, Seoul, France, London, and so on) can be easily replicable in other
cities around the world, as is the case with Uber. Therefore, this research will contribute to global urban policy by
identifying the causal factors that shape policy interventions, and how they are decided based on the relationship
between the market and state. This research does not examine other potential factors in policy implementation
of local governments, such as economic condition and scale, urban form, population density, and so, this socioeconomic condition of city will be investigated for the future research.
References
 Centeno, M.A., & Portes, A. (2006). The Informal Economy in the Shadow of the State.Out of the
shadows: Political action and the informal economy in Latin America, 22-48.
 Cross, J.C., & Pena, S. (2006). Risk and Regulation in Informal and Illegal Markets.Out of the shadows:
Political action and the informal economy in Latin America, 49-80.
 Teal, R. F., & Berglund, M. (1987). The  impact of taxicab deregulation in the USA. Journal of transport
economics and policy, 37-56.
 Schaller, B. (2007). Entry controls in taxi regulation: Implications of US and Canadian experience for taxi
regulation and deregulation. transportation Policy, 14(6), 490-506.

Abstract Index #: 828
THE EFFECTS OF FEDERAL POLICY ON REGIONAL FREIGHT PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 1222
Individual Paper
HOWLETT, Marc [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] mhowlett@live.unc.edu
The Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act (ISTEA) in 1991 ostensibly began a new era of federal
transportation policy in the United States, emphasizing multimodal planning and bringing greater balance
between regional metropolitan planning organizations (MPOs) and state departments of transportation (state
DOTs). Freight was one area within transportation to receive greater emphasis in ISTEA and subsequent federal
legislation. Despite initial enthusiasm, more than two decades after the passage of the watershed law, in many
ways the ISTEA revolution remains unrealized. This study assesses the effects of ISTEA-era federal policy on the
freight planning capacity of MPOs with a particular focus on the widely-lauded policy to assign higher levels of
authority and responsibility to MPOs representing regions with populations greater than 200,000. To model the
effects of federal policy on regional freight planning, an index of MPO freight planning capacity was created using
data gained from a national survey of MPOs and was then combined with data from secondary sources. Findings
from regression discontinuity models show no effect of the policy of assigning higher levels of authority to large
MPOs on the capacity of MPOs to conduct freight planning. Additional models also show minimal effect of other
federal policy including air quality conformance and consideration of environment justice  impact. As freight
transportation receives increasing attention from urban_planning professionals and researchers, findings from
this study help inform ongoing debates about the uncertain future of federal transportation policy.

References
 Giuliano, G., T. O'Brien, L. Dablanc, and K. Holliday. 2013. NCFRP Report 23: Synthesis of Freight
Research in Urban Transportation Planning. Transportation Research Board.
 Goldman, T., and E. Deakin. 2000. Regionalism through Partnerships? Metropolitan Planning since ISTEA.
Berkeley Planning Journal 14:46-75.
 Rosenbloom, S., and M. Wachs. 2012. A Federal Role in Freight Planning and Finance. Santa Monica, CA:
Rand Corporation.
 Taylor, B.D., and L. Schweitzer. 2005. Assessing the Experience of Mandated Collaborative InterJurisdictional transportation Planning in the United States. transportation Policy 12 (6):500-511.

Abstract Index #: 829
DIFFERENT WAYS TO GET TO THE SAME PLACES: FINANCIAL INEQUALITY OF COMMUTING AMONG INCOME
GROUPS
Abstract System ID#: 1225
Individual Paper
HU, Lingqian [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee] hul@uwm.edu
Our understanding of low-income persons’ travel behavior is limited, and thus transportation planning and
policies often fail to effectively address their travel needs. Such failure limits low-income persons’ access to
various opportunities and further enlarges socioeconomic gaps. This research investigates how financial
constraints affect different income groups’ commuting trips. I hypothesize that lower-income workers’
commuting time and travel mode are more sensitive to changes in monetary costs than higher-income workers.
As the hypothesis is explored, I will identify a variety of factors that may have different influences on commuting,
including cost of gas, parking, toll, transit fare and passes.
The study area is the eight-county Chicago metropolitan area. It has a strong central city, the city of Chicago, with
about 32 percent of the total jobs. Workers at different income levels commute to the same employment
centers, allowing me to examine differences in commuting behavior of the workers who share the same
workplace locations. Individual socioeconomic and travel data come from the Chicago Regional Household Travel
Inventory (CRHTI). CRHTI data also provide information of the census tracts where each worker’s home and
workplace are located. To understand the economic and demographic characteristics of each traveler’s housing
and workplace locations, I collect census tract level data from the 2006-2010 5-year U.S. Census American
Community Survey (ACS) and Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) data. I use multinomial logit
regression models to estimate the effects of monetary costs on different income groups’ commuting mode and
log-linear Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression models on commuting time, controlling socioeconomic and
neighborhood variables.
Results of this research will identify specific financial constraints of commuting faced by low-income workers, and
can suggest policy instruments to relieve these constraints. Potentially viable policy options include giving lowincome workers vouchers to reduce the burden of monetary cost or improving efficiency of the transit and
bicycle system to reduce travel time. Results of this research will help us develop a more complete
understanding of inequity in transportation system and propose innovative ways to increase equality.
References
 Hiroyuki Iseki
 Xinyu Cao
 Evelyn Blumenberg
 Genevieve Giuliano
 Yingling Fan

Abstract Index #: 830
AIRPORT EXPANSION: ASSESSING THE VULNERABILITY OF AIRPORT-ADJACENT comminuty
Abstract System ID#: 1232
Individual Paper
WOODBURN, Amber [University of Pennsylvania] amber.woodburn@gmail.com
Airports sprouted throughout America nearly a century ago, virtually in tandem with the rise of urban_planning.
In his 1930 study of airport conditions, Austin McDonald remarked, "In a way, airport planning is simpler than
most phases of the planning movement, because it has no hoary traditions gathered about it and no century-old
mistakes to be corrected." Modern airports have since emerged from the airfields of the Winged Gospel to
become regional transportation hubs fostering economic growth and global connectivity. This research builds on
scholarship that evaluates hub airport planning in the 21st century, when 19 primary hub airports planned and
deployed a new or extended runway, to investigate what airport planning “traditions” and “mistakes” have
emerged over the last century. Specifically, this research investigates environment justice outcomes for
neighborhoods adjacent to America’s 68 primary and secondary hub airports: Did hub airport expansion (post2000) occur more often, or disproportionately, when the airport-adjacent neighborhood contained certain
demographics or environment features?
The aviation literature broadly calls out for greater study of environment  impact of airport expansion. To fill
this research gap, we can look to planning literature on urban renewal and environment racism to better
contextualize the  impact of airport expansion on minority groups. Urban renewal research illuminated the
pattern of disproportionate  impact on minority comminuty and created a shift in the culture of highway
planning. Similar to highways, federally funded airport infrastructure is subject to the National environment
Policy Act and other legislation designed to critically examine and prevent disproportionate or significant  impact
on the human and natural environment. However, airport infrastructure expansion has yet to undergo the same
degree of scrutiny from planning scholars, while airport planning in practice systematically favors case-by-case
airport reviews over aggregate narratives of the larger hub network. This project advances aviation and planning
research towards a more aggregate and qualitative review of the  impact of airport development on airportadjacent comminuty.
This research first contributes a classification of airport comminuty that describes patterns in their
demographics and environment features. Second, this research statistically tests, using spatial analysis and
regression modeling, whether hub airport development in the 21st century occurred disproportionately in
communities with certain demographics and environment features. This research generates new knowledge in
the demographic and topographic characteristics of airport-adjacent neighborhood to better describe the
vulnerability of populations and environments surrounding hub airports. In addition, this research offers insight
into the effectiveness of the National environment Policy Act and other social and environment laws that
inform the airport planning process.
References
 Robertson, T. (2014). The bird’s-eye view: Toward an environment history of aviation. The Journal of
Transport History, 35(2), 220–224. doi:10.7227/TJTH.35.2.6
 Ryerson, M. S., & Woodburn, A. (2014). Build Airport Capacity or Manage Flight Demand? How Regional
Planners Can Lead American Aviation Into a New Frontier of Demand Management. Journal of the
American Planning Association, 80(2), 138–152. doi:10.1080/01944363.2014.961949
 Schweitzer, L., & Zhou, J. (2010). Neighborhood Air Quality, Respiratory Health, and Vulnerable
Populations in Compact and Sprawled Regions. Journal of the American Planning Association, 76(3),
363–371. doi:10.1080/01944363.2010.486623
 Sobotta, R. R., Campbell, H. E., & Owens, B. J. (2007). Aviation noise and environment justice: the
barrio barrier. Journal of Regional Science, 47(1), 125–154. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9787.2007.00503.x
 Upham, P., Thomas, C., Gillingwater, D., & Raper, D. (2003). environment capacity and airport
operations: current issues and future prospects. Journal of Air transportation Management, 9, 145–151.

Abstract Index #: 831
INSTITUTIONAL INVESTMENT IN CHINA’S INFRASTRUCTURE
Abstract System ID#: 1239
Individual Paper
WU, Weiping [Tufts University] weiping.wu@tufts.edu
Rapid growth in post-reform China has resulted in a high demand for infrastructure and the need for sustained
mechanisms of financing. As public finances are already overstretched at the local level, seeking long-term
investment financing seems imperative. A potential such source is institutional investors, including pension funds,
insurance companies, endowments, and sovereign wealth funds. The higher long‐term risk adjusted returns,
amongst other benefits, make infrastructure an attractive asset class for institutional investors. But in general, all
categories of long-term financing have been affected by the 2008 global financial crisis, including debt flows,
bank lending, bonds, and foreign direct investment (World Bank 2013). On the more positive side, a McKinsey
report predicts that funds managed by institutional investors will grow significantly, and infrastructure projects
have the opportunity to capture more of their capital (MGI 2013).
This paper provides an intellectual foundation for understanding institutional investment in China’s
infrastructure. Integrating issue conceptualization with diagnostic analysis, it focuses on economic infrastructure,
including transport, energy, telecommunications, water and sewerage, and other utilities. Specifically, it offers an
in-depth analysis of the prospects for institutional investment in China, as related to the investment
environment, divergent investor groups, and opportunities in various sectors. Drawing from experiences
elsewhere, the paper also explores how non-bank financial intermediaries can be developed to harness
institutional investment. The paper is informed by interviews with a select group of fund managers and
investment professionals based globally and in China.
References
 McKinsey Global Institute (MGI). 2013. Infrastructure Productivity: How to Save $1 Trillion a Year?
(retrieved on 26 September 2013 from
http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/engineering_construction/infrastructure_productivity).
 World Bank. 2013. “Long-Term Investment Financing for Growth and Development: Umbrella Paper.”
Presented to the Meeting of the G20 Ministers of Finance and Central Bank Governors, February,
Moscow, Russia.

Abstract Index #: 832
RETAILERS IN AND AROUND LOS ANGELES' MASS TRANSIT INFRASTRUCTURE
Abstract System ID#: 1245
Individual Paper
OLWERT, Craig [California State University, Northridge] craig.olwert@csun.edu, presenting author, primary
author
ARELLANO, Vicente [California State University, Northridge] vicente.arellano.786@my.csun.edu
With an increased emphasis on sustainability, city have been developing their mass transit system with a
renewed focus on subway, light rail, and bus rapid transit system. Ridership increases when high-density mixeduse development occurs around stations. Transit Oriented Development (TOD), usually built in response to
announced rail or subway stations, is characterized by this high-density mixed-use residential, office and retail
spaces. However, gentrification also occurs along these new lines and stations, with negative effects on the
original residents. Rising land values leading to higher rents and property taxes dislocating both residents and
local retailers (Kahn, 2007).

The retail aspect of TOD is especially important as it increases foot traffic and makes the area a destination.
Retail markets adjust to demand for product types, retail rents, and customer traffic and agglomeration effects.
A large transit stop increases customer traffic and increases the probability of a retailers locating in the area
(Sevtsuk, 2014). The higher rents may lead to more chain stores. However, many community developers focus
on local “mom and pop” stores that cater to neighborhood needs and provide local employment versus
corporate and franchise chain stores that may reduce the unique local milieu (Lew, 1989; Harris, 2006). This
study evaluates the loss of local stores around Los Angeles transit stations.
This study collected data on the use of retail space within one-half mile of a random sample of the Los Angeles’
transit stations. Data collected includes store name, NAICS classification, a chain indicator, an indicator of new
buildings (built after 2005), and the building type. All retail stores are being collected, as well as other uses that
fill retail spaces. For example, strip malls typically contain just retail, but can also have uses such as medical and
legal offices. Census tract level data incorporates population and socioeconomic status of the station area.
The analysis compares retail distribution between station types based on socioeconomic and urban/suburban
characteristics. Higher income, more suburban, area have a higher proportion of chain stores. A comparison
between the quarter- and half-mile radii demonstrates denser retail development and more chains near the
transit stations, with less vacancies and non-retail uses in retail properties. Finally, newer developments will be
shown to have more chain development than already existing buildings. This study verifies these hypotheses and
helps determine the effect of transit stations on the retail structure of Los Angeles.
References
 Harris, T. 2006. The economic and social impact of big box retailers: Discussion. American Journal of
Agricultural Economics, 88, 1311-1312.
 Kahn, M. 2007. Gentrification trends in new transit-oriented comminuty: Evidence from 14 city that
expanded and built rail transit system. Real Estate Economics, 35, 155-182.
 Lew, A. 1989. Authenticity and sense of place in the tourism development experience of older retail
districts. Journal of Travel Research, 27, 15-22.
 Renne, J. 2009. From transit-adjacent to transit-oriented development. Local Environment, 14:1, 1-15.
 Sevtsuk, A. 2014. Location and agglomeration: The distribution of retail and food businesses in dense
urban environments. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 34:4, 374-393.

Abstract Index #: 833
BICYCLE TRAFFIC MODELING WITH GIS AND CTPP (CENSUS TRANSPORTATION PLANNING PRODUCT) DATA
Abstract System ID#: 1256
Individual Paper
HUANG, Guoping [University of Virginia] ghuang@virginia.edu
Since the 1970s energy crisis, bicycle planning has gradually gained momentum in many metropolitan area.
Today, almost every metropolitan planning organization (MPO) has published bicycle master plan to provide
guidance and support for promoting safe, easy-to-use and connected bicycle infrastructure. However, unlike
well-established vehicular transportation planning, bicycle planning has long suffered from the lack of
systematically documented bicycle traffic data. To address this issue, different MPOs seek different solutions.
Some used survey to provide supplementary data, some developed methodologies for non-motorized traffic
monitoring and counting. However, all these efforts require additional resources from local governments. When
the local budget for bicycle infrastructure improvement is already quite stringent, it is usually very difficult to
secure additional budge for data acquisition effort.
Census Transportation Planning Product (CTPP) has long been used as an important dataset for transportation
planning. It is systematically documented to capture demographic characteristics, home and work locations, and
modes of transportation of all the commuters including bicycle commuters. Although CTPP data is freely
available, it has been largely overlooked by bicycle planners due to the lack of specific route information and non-

commute travel information. This paper proposes a GIS analytical model to model bicycle traffic by simulating the
route that bicycle commuter most likely takes from the origin Transportation Analysis Zone (TAZ) to the
destination TAZ.
In this model, route choice of a cyclist is assessed with an integrative index system that combines spatial distance
and time distance with safety ratings and ease of use ratings for all the segments of roads, alleyways and other
bikeable surfaces. Many environment factors including road grades, traffic volume, bike related traffic
accidents, speed limit, surface condition, bike lane types, etc. , are quantitatively modeled. This integrative index
is used to replace the travel distance and travel time attributes in a network dataset in GIS, thus to trick the
traditional routing algorithm into considering these environment factors in analyzing the best route between
origin and destination. CPTT data feeds the newly built network dataset with thousands of pairs of origins and
destinations from census survey to generate most likely routes for all the bicycle commuters. All the output
routes are spatially overlaid and summarized to represent the frequency of usage.
With this GIS model, we could turn the untapped CTPP data into a valuable resource for bicycle planners to use in
many applications such as improvement project prioritization.
References
 Lindsey, Greg, Steve Hankey, Xize Wang, and Junzhou Chen. 2013. The Minnesota Bicycle and Pedestrian
Counting Initiative: Methodologies for Non-Motorized Traffic Monitoring. Report. Minnesota
Department of Transportation. http://conservancy.umn.edu/handle/11299/162791.
 Aultman-Hall, Lisa, Fred Hall, and Brian Baetz. 1997. “Analysis of Bicycle Commuter Routes Using
Geographic Information system: Implications for Bicycle Planning.” Transportation Research Record:
Journal of the Transportation Research Board 1578 (January): 102–10. doi:10.3141/1578-13.
 Antonakos, Cathy L. 1994. “ENVIRONMENTAL AND TRAVEL PREFERENCES OF CYCLISTS.” Transportation
Research Record, no. 1438. http://trid.trb.org/view.aspx?id=413764.

Abstract Index #: 834
UNDERSTANDING THE TEMPORAL-SPATIAL PATTERNS OF MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENTS
Abstract System ID#: 1261
Individual Paper
KIM, Karl [University of Hawaii at Manoa] karlk@hawaii.edu, presenting author, primary author
YAMASHITA, Eric [University of Hawaii at Manoa] ericyama@hawaii.edu
PANT, Pradip [University of Hawaii at Manoa] pradip@hawaii.edu
Using crash data from the state of Hawaii, we examine the location and temporal distribution of alcohol-related
crashes, considering both roadway and environment characteristics as well driver attributes. In addition to
having a distinct temporal signature, alcohol-related collisions also exhibit spatial patterns which are a function of
both underlying  land_use and activity generators and the behaviors of drivers. The policy implications for both
enforcement as well as other approaches to curbing DUI are considered. The paper considers issues related to
data, statistical modeling, spatial and temporal analysis, and the unique yet important contributions of urban and
regional planners.
References
 Kim, K., Pant, P. and Yamashita, E. (in press) Evacuation Planning for Plausible Worst Case Inundation
Scenarios in Honolulu. Journal of Emergency Management.
 Kim, K., et. al. (2013) Learning from Crisis: Transit Evacuation in Honolulu. Transportation Research
Record. Vol. 2376. Pp. 56-62.
 Kim, K., Pant, P., Yamashita, E., and Brunner, I M (2012) Entropy and Accidents. Transportation Research
Record. Volume 2280. Pp. 173-182.

Abstract Index #: 835
UNDERSTANDING THE TEMPORAL-SPATIAL PATTERNS OF MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENTS
Abstract System ID#: 1262
Pre-organized Session: Traffic Safety Planning
KIM, Karl [University of Hawaii at Manoa] karlk@hawaii.edu
Using crash data from the state of Hawaii, we examine the locations and temporal distribution of alcohol-related
crashes, considering both roadway and environment characteristics as well driver attributes. In addition to
having a distinct temporal signature, alcohol-related collisions also exhibit spatial patterns which are a function of
both underlying  land_use and activity generators and the behaviors of drivers. The policy implications for both
enforcement as well as other approaches to curbing DUI are considered. The paper considers issues related to
data, statistical modeling, spatial and temporal analysis, and the unique yet important contributions of urban and
regional planners.
References
 Kim, K., Pant, P., Yamashita, E., and Brunner, I M (2012) Entropy and Accidents. Transportation Research
Record. Volume 2280. Pp. 173-182.
 Kim, K., Pant, P., Yamashita, E., and Brunner, I M (2012) Entropy and Accidents. Transportation Research
Record. Volume 2280. Pp. 173-182.
o Kim, K., Pant., P., Yamashita, E. (2011) Measuring the Influence of Accessibility on Accident
Severity with Structural Equation Modeling. Transportation Research Record, Vol. 11-2663, pp.
1-10.
 Kim, K., Pant, P., Yamashita, E., and Brunner, I M (2012) Entropy and Accidents. Transportation Research
Record. Volume 2280. Pp. 173-182.
 Kim, K., Pant, P., Yamashita, E. (2010). Accidents and Accessibility: Measuring the Influences Of
Demographic And  land_use Variables In Honolulu, Hawaii. Transportation Research Record. Vol. 102901. Pp. 9-17
 Kim, K. and E. Yamashita (2006) Using K-means to Analyze the Spatial Pattern of Pedestrian Crashes in
Honolulu. Journal of Advanced Transportation, Vol. 41. No. 1. Pp. 69-89.

Abstract Index #: 836
ACCESSIBILITY-BASED transportation PLANNING: HOW TO MAKE IT HAPPEN?
Abstract System ID#: 1264
Individual Paper
ZHAO, PENGJUN [Peking University] pengjunzhao@yahoo.com
Transport planning usually focuses on provision of transportation infrastructures and services with an aim to ease
passengers and freights' movement demand. As a result, transportation policy are often limited to mobility-based
improvements which favour quantity and quality of physical travel over a broader range of socioeconomic and
environmental  impact, vehicles over people, and automobile travel over alternative modes. Planners and
politicians are often faced a dilemma: while transportation improvements may increase transportation speed and service
capacity in a place for some people, they may cause a problem with socio-spatial inequities to other places and
other people. Recently, accessibility-based transportation approach has been widely discussed and applied to evaluate
the performances of transportation improvements. Accessibility is a product of mobility, proximity and remote
connectivity. Accessibility-based planning focus on facilitating passengers and freights' access to destinations
rather than mobility itself. It has a system view on passengers and freights' movement, including transport, land
use, economic development and social features. It is believed that there is a shift from mobility-oriented analysis
to accessibility-based analysis is occurring in transportation planning.
However, even though the conceptions and potential advantages of accessibility-based planning have been
widely discussed, a key question is still remaining to be answered: how to make it happen? This paper aims to

answer the question. First, a basic comprehensive theoretical formwork for accessibility-based planning is
proposed in the paper. Second, the policy performances of accessibility-based planning is discussed in terms of its
effectiveness, efficiency, enforcement and equity  impact. Third, key technical and institutional barriers to the
fulfillment of accessibility-based planning are justified and discussed. Finally, policy options are suggested to
overcome the barriers. The discussions and conclusions in the paper would enhance our existing knowledge of
the theory and policy of accessibility-based planning.
References
 Curtis, C., Law, N. 2012. Institutional Barriers to Sustainable transportation (Vol. Farnham). Ashgate,
Farnham.
 Hrelja, R., 2015. Integrating transportation and land-use planning? How steering cultures in local authorities
affect implementation of integrated public transportation and land-use planning. Transportation Research
Part A: 74(4), 1-13.
 Morris, J. M., Dumble, P. L., Wigan, M. R., 1979. Accessibility indicators for transportation planning.
Transportation Research A 13(2), 91-109.
 Vickerman, R. W., 1974. Accessibility, attraction, and potential: a review of some concepts and their use
in determining mobility. Environment and Planning A 6(6), 675-691.
 Waddell, P., Ulfarsson, G. F., Franklin, J. P., Lobb, J., 2007. Incorporating  land_use in metropolitan
transportation planning. Transportation Research Part A 41(5), 382-410.

Abstract Index #: 837
SHARED SPACE AND BICYCLISTS: ANALYSIS OF PATHS TAKEN THROUGH SHARED SPACE INTERSECTIONS IN
ENGLAND
Abstract System ID#: 1274
Poster
DUNCAN, Allison [Portland State University] abduncan@pdx.edu
Shared space is a traffic calming technique and design concept. The technique is relatively new, and the majority
of existing research concerns pedestrians only. This mixed methods study was international in scope focusing on
intersections in England. The goal of this research was to understand how cyclists perceive and travel through
shared space intersections by observing cyclists as they traverse selected sites and control sites and surveying
those cyclists traveling through both types of sites. Using video observations of six sites in three city, three
shared and three control intersections, analysis of the paths taken by 1750 cyclists looked at the variation in the
paths ridden through the control intersections as compared to the shared space intersections. The tracking of the
paths chosen by cyclists at each intersection also noted whether crosswalks and/or sidewalks were used by the
cyclists. The survey addressed the perceptions, bicycling experience, demographics, and path and route
preferences by cyclists at both shared space and control intersections. It was hypothesized that cyclist paths
would not show much variation between shared space and control intersections as well as that certain groups
may avoid riding through the shared space intersections due to their increased perception of risk. Analysis also
looked at the relationships between helmet use, bicycle type, and path choices. These findings may indicate that
shared space designs do not benefit cyclists as the design theory itself states.

Abstract Index #: 838
LAND VALUE  impact OF TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT: WHAT DO EMPIRICAL STUDIES SHOW?
Abstract System ID#: 1277
Individual Paper
SHEN, Qing [University of Washington] qs@uw.edu
Transit oriented development (TOD) has gained popularity over the last two decades in the US and many other
countries. An important attraction of TOD is its great potential to capitalize—in the form of land value

appreciation—the increased regional accessibility provided by the transit service, as well as the local convenience
and amenity created by coupling mixed  land_use with pedestrian and bike-friendly street design. The resulting
higher land values will enable local governments and/or public transit agencies to generate additional revenues
through property value capture, which can subsequently reinforce public transportation investment and
operation. Therefore, TOD could conceivably serve as an effective approach to financially sustainable urban
development, while creating environment and social values by reducing automobile dependence, increasing
transit ridership, and encouraging non-motorized travel.
The basic question remains, however, as to what extent real-world TOD projects have fulfilled the great promise
of land value creation and capture. While many researchers have published studies that were aimed at
empirically examining the effects of TOD on land value, the results have varied substantially. The great majority
of studies have found a positive land value impact, although the estimated gains show a wide range; but a few
studies have found a negative effect on land value.
We are conducting an Energy Foundation-sponsored study that has two primary objectives: (1) to gain a better
understanding of the land value impact of TOD, and (2) to explore and assess alternative channels through which
TOD-generated property value can be captured by local governments and/or public transit agencies. This paper
presents our research focusing on the first objective. The research design has two key components. The first is a
meta-analysis of peer-reviewed studies completed during the last twenty years, which aims to more systematic
and closely examine the estimated changes in land value attributed to TOD. We collect empirical results from
about four dozens of published studies and employ meta-analysis techniques to synthesize the estimated effects
of TOD on property values. We identify the studies that show, respectively, the largest, average, and smallest
land value  impact and investigate the likely causes of these different results. The second key component is an
empirical effort aimed at testing the hypothesis that a significant portion of the variation in the estimated land
value  impact is due to differences in sample selection (e.g. cross-sectional studies using data drawn for different
times after the transit service started). Using data from Seattle, we estimate hedonic housing price models based
on different samples of property transaction data, which are drawn from different years of sales and from
different area near light rail stations, and compare the regression outcomes.
Our preliminary results indicate that land value changes in TOD area vary considerably, with estimated housing
price impact at one quarter of mile from transit station ranging from negative 8% to positive 50%, and averaging
about 10%. Part of the variation is due to contextual factors such as the demographic profile and the design and
layout of the TOD area, but part of the difference points to possible methodological issues that are common to
many studies. While still in progress, we expect our hedonic housing price models will suggest that sample
selection is, indeed, a significant contributor to the widely varied estimations of the land value impact of TOD.
References
 Bartholomew, Keith, and Reid Ewing. "Hedonic price effects of pedestrian-and transit-oriented
development." Journal of Planning Literature 26, no. 1 (2011): 18-34.
 Cervero, Robert, et al. Transit-oriented development in the United States: experiences, challenges, and
prospects. Vol. 102. Transportation Research Board, 2004.
 Glass, Gene V. "Primary, secondary, and meta-analysis of research." Educational researcher (1976): 3-8.
 Hedges, Larry V., and Ingram Olkin. Statistical method for meta-analysis. Academic press, 2014.
 Mathur, Shishir. Innovation in Public transportation Finance: Property Value Capture. Ashgate Publishing,
Ltd., 2014.

Abstract Index #: 839
MODELING CAR OWNERSHIP CHOICE IN A CHINESE MEGACITY: WITH SPECIAL CONSIDERATION TO ATTITUDES
TOWARDS CAR AND PUBLIC TRANSIT
Abstract System ID#: 1287
Individual Paper
HE, Sylvia [The Chinese University of Hong Kong] sylviahe@cuhk.edu.hk

Chinese megacities are undergoing rapid motorization. The aim of this research is to elucidate key factors in car
ownership choice. Data are drawn from a recent travel survey conducted in Guangzhou, China in 2013.
Attitudinal information, along with personal attributes, household characteristics, transit accessibility, and
residential location variables are considered in discrete choice models. The results reveal that people who have
better attitudes towards cars over public transit are more likely to be car owners. The study also shows that,
although both substantial utility and symbolic utility are influential in car ownership choice, Chinese potential car
owners highly value the substantial utility of a vehicle, rather than seeing car ownership merely as a symbol of
wealth and status. Income and housing tenure are two important determinants in car ownership choice. A
number of hypothetical pricing policy and systematic changes to the transit system are also discussed in terms
of their effectiveness in reducing car use for current car owners and wannabes. The paper concludes with a policy
recommendation that, to manage motorization in China’s megacities, transit development and car ownership
control are both necessary strategies.
References
 Beirão, Gtransport and private. & Cabral, J.A.S. (2007). Understanding attitudes towards public car: A
qualitative study. transportation Policy, 14, 478–489.
 Golob, T.F., Horowitz, A.D., & Wachs, M. (1979). Attitude-behavior relationships in travel demand
modeling. In Hensher, D.A. & Stopher, P.R. (Eds), Behavioral Travel Demand Modeling. Croom Helm,
London, pp. 739–757.
 Gärling and Schuitema (2007), Travel demand management targeting reduced private car use:
effectiveness, public acceptability and political feasibility, Journal of Social Issues, 63, 139-153.
 Whelan, G. (2007). Modelling car ownership in Great Britain. Transportation Research Part A, 41, 205219.
 Gan, L. (2001). Globalization of the automobile industry in China: Dynamics and barriers in the greening
of road transportation. Energy Policy, 31, 537–551.

Abstract Index #: 840
EQUITY OF EMPLOYEE PARKING CHARGES
Abstract System ID#: 1288
Individual Paper
DEAKIN, Elizabeth [UC Berkeley] edeakin@berkeley.edu
In the United States, driving remains the principal means of travel to work. National data for 2012 show that 86%
of American workers commute using personal vehicles, with 76% driving alone and ten percent carpooling
(Bureau of Transportation Statistics (BTS), 2012). National data also show that lower income workers, while
spending less in absolute terms on commuting than do higher income commuters, spend a far higher share of
their income on commuting. Low income workers use public transit, carpooling, biking, and walking more
frequently than higher income workers, and this is helps them keep commuting costs down, but a majority of low
income workers, including 66 percent of the working poor, commute by car and spend up to 10 percent of their
income on commuting (BTS, 2003).
Parking charges can be a substantial portion of total commuting expenses. For example, the variable cost of fuel,
tires, and maintenance is currently about 19 cents a mile (BTS, 2013) and the average commute length is about
12 miles, so that the variable cost of a round trip commute by car is about $4.56. While Shoup (2011) reports
that 95% of US employees are provided a parking space free of charge, in urban area where parking charges are
in fact in place, they typically run $5-12/day (Auchincloss, et al. , 2014). Such charges can double or triple the
cost of commuting by car.
Furthermore, costs of providing parking are often considerably higher than such prices. A recent study shows that
full cost recovery for parking built at national average (US) costs on urban land would require $10-30 a day in
fees, and even more in area with particularly high land costs (Tudela et al., 2014). In part because of these high

costs, a number of city and some employers have shown increasing interest in reforming parking pricing, both
setting prices to better reflect costs and passing the costs along to the consumer. However, the equity of such
pricing remains an issue, as does concern that full cost parking could shrink the employer’s labor pool.
This paper presents an analysis of the equity of higher parking charges. The paper begins with a brief review of
the literature relevant to the study, including work on the cost of providing parking and on mode choices and
commute alternatives by income group. An analysis of parking price impact by commuter income quintile under
various scenarios is then presented. Both national data on mode choice and parking costs and data for the case of
Berkeley, California are analyzed.
Policy options that would combine parking charges with strategies for mitigating adverse effects on lower-income
workers are then identified and evaluated. The paper shows that transit and rideshare subsidies can be both
effective and equitable alternatives to subsidized parking, increasing welfare for the lowest-income workers.
Likewise four day work weeks, part-time telecommuting, and off-peak working hours can be effective strategies
for reducing costs for some subsets of the low income workforce, as well as reducing parking costs for employers.
The final section of the paper discusses implications and recommendations for employers and parking providers
who may wish to pursue parking management strategies with an eye toward equity.
References
 BTS, US DOT. 2003. Commuting Expenses: Disparity for the Working Poor, Issue Brief, March 2003. At
https://www.rita.dot.gov/bts/sites/rita.dot.gov.bts/files/publications/special_reports_and_issue_briefs/
issue_briefs/number_01/pdf/entire.pdf. Accessed 3-1-2015
 BTS, USDOT. 2014. Pocket Guide to Transportation 2014 Edition. 2009 data on commuting, p. 10. At
http://www.rita.dot.gov/bts/sites/rita.dot.gov.bts/files/Pocket_Guide_2014.pdf. Accessed 3-1-2015
 Shoup, D. 2011. The High Cost of Free Parking, American Planning Association (Planners Press).
 Auchincloss, A. H., Weinberger R. R,, Aytur S., Namba A., Ricchezza, A. Public Parking Fees and Fines. A
Survey of U.S. city. Public Works Management & policy, March 2014, pp. 1-11.
 Tudela, A. et al. (2014) Cost vs. Price for Parking at Major Employment Centers, Proceedings of the
Transportation Research Board Annual Meeting, January 2015.

Abstract Index #: 841
MEASURING ACCESSIBILITY AND EQUITY IN TRANSPORTATION FROM A HUMAN POINT OF VIEW USING BIG
URBAN DATA
Abstract System ID#: 1302
Individual Paper
ROFE, Yodan [Ben-Gurion University of the Negev] yrofe@bgu.ac.il, presenting author, primary author
GEYZERSKY, Dmitry [Citygraph Ltd.] dima@performit.co.il
BENENSON, Itzhak [Tel-Aviv University] bennya@post.tau.ac.il
BEN-ELIA, Eran [Ben-Gurion University of the Negev] benelia@bgu.ac.il
MARTENS, Karel [Radboud University Nijmegen] k.martens@fm.ru.nl
MEDNIK, Nataly [Ben-Gurion University of the Negev] n.b.mednik@gmail.com
SAFRA, Eli [Citygraph Ltd.] eli.safra@ctgraph.com
Accessibility is a key indicator to assess transportation investments, urban policy and urban form, and investment in
public transportation is often seen as fundamental to creating a more sustainable transportation system. Public
transit agencies are often torn between providing transportation alternatives to those who are dependent on
public transit for their access to jobs, education, commerce and services, and those who are present users of
automobiles. While the first objective is easily measured by the mode share of trips, the second objective –
transportation equity - has been more difficult to measure systematically.

We examine both horizontal and vertical equity (Delbosc, Currie, 2011), and we use the standard measures of
inequity used in public economics: the Lorentz Curve and the Gini index, in order to calculate the level of inequity
within the transportation system. To evaluate horizontal inequity we calculate the accessibility by public transit
relative to the automobile. To calculate vertical inequity, we weight the relative accessibility by the typical
dependency on public transit in each zone modifying the approach used by Currie (2009).
Typically, accessibility is modelled at a granular level of transportation analysis zones (TAZ) or census tracts. An
adequate view of urban accessibility, however, demands analysis at a spatial resolution relating to human
mobility - moving from one building at the point of origin and arriving to another building at the point of
destination. Until recently, the possibility of this view was limited by the availability of spatially-explicit data.
Nowadays, these data are available but their use raises heavy computational problems: a typical metropolitan
area with a population of several million people, demands processing of hundreds of thousands of origins and
destinations, tens of thousands street segments and thousands of transit lines of different kinds (Benenson et al.,
2010; 2011).
We apply AccessCity (a program specially designed by Citygraph to carry out such heavy computation) to
compare the old and new transit system in Metropolitan Tel Aviv, and to investigate the importance of specific
transit lines. The analysis is based on a new measure of Access Travel Time ATT(O, M, W) spent by the travellers
who start at a given origin – O and travel to all possible destinations D, for a given activity W (e.g. work), by a
certain transportation mode M. The Access Travel Time is estimated for all origins and destinations (i.e. all 300K
buildings within the Tel-Aviv metropolitan area) and for two transportation modes (private car and transit), and is
then plotted on an accessibility map at the resolution of buildings.
High-resolution analysis of the transit network of Tel Aviv metropolitan area reveals large gaps in the accessibility
levels between car-based and transit-based mobility, as well as particular places which are high dependent on
public transit, and which are ill-served.
In our paper we examine several scenarios that show how to apply the proposed indices and the maps of these
indices for the spatial analysis of transportation network changes and discuss their advantages and limitations.
References
 Benenson, Itzhak, Karel Martens, Yodan Rofé, and Ariela Kwartler. 2011. “Public transportation versus Private
Car GIS-Based Estimation of Accessibility Applied to the Tel Aviv Metropolitan Area.” The Annals of
Regional Science 47(3):499–515.
 Currie, Graham. 2009. “Policy Forum : Urban transportation Australian Urban transportation and Social
Disadvantage.” The Australian Economic Review 42(2):201–8.
 Delbosc, Alexa, and Graham Currie. 2011. “The Spatial Context of transportation Disadvantage, Social
Exclusion and Well-Being.” Journal of transportation Geography 19(6):1130–37. Retrieved June 3, 2014
 Pangbourne, K., J. Anable, Alexa Delbosc, and Graham Currie. 2011. “Using Lorenz Curves to Assess
Public transportation Equity.” Journal of transportation Geography 19(6):1252–59.
 Lucas, K. (2012), transportation and social exclusion: Where are we now? transportation Policy 20: 105-113

Abstract Index #: 842
THE POLITICS OF MEGAPROJECT PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 1315
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session
TRAPENBERG FRICK, Karen [University of California, Berkeley] kfrick@berkeley.edu
PLOTCH, Philip [New School University] plotp932@newschool.edu
SIEMIATYCKI, Matti [University of Toronto] siemiatycki@geog.utoronto.ca
WHITTINGTON, Jan [University of Washington] janwhit@uw.edu

Transportation megaprojects typically cost more than $1 billion and can determine the future location of
businesses and residences for decades if not centuries to come (Capka 2004). Megaprojects may be a governor’s
lasting legacy, a city’s icon, and a designer’s claim to fame. They may also be a major source of contention when
they have major cost overruns, are intrusive, displace residents and businesses, and have unintended
environmental consequences.
This roundtable brings together scholars on megaproject planning whose work helps to explain conflicts and
cooperation, and also reveals assumptions, arguments, and norms about the development and evolution of
projects. Although a transportation planning process may appear to be a rational process based on standard and
objective methodologies, it may actually mask a politicized process where decisions are made for reasons that
are not technical in nature (Goetz and Szyliowicz, 1997; Flyvbjerg, 2014).
This roundtable’s purpose is to synthesize and debate the state of knowledge about megaproject planning and to
look to future research avenues to inform practice, scholarship, and education with the goal of improving project
performance and public deliberation about major infrastructure. We will look specifically at two prominent cases,
transaction cost economics, innovative finance and public private partnerships.
We will focus on two flagship megaproject case studies in the United States: the new Tappan Zee Bridge in New
York and the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge. We also will examine the application of transaction cost
economics to explain how it can be employed to reveal the tradeoffs between pace of delivery, public
participation, environment compliance, and cost overruns on transportation projects (e.g., Whittington 2012).
Integrating economics with the political science of implementation (Pressman and Wildavsky, 1984), we will
review how transaction-cost economic analysis can be applied to comparatively analyze bridge megaprojects
across the U.S., irrespective of form of project delivery, thereby creating an empirical basis for estimating the
economic consequences of political decisions for this critical infrastructure.
Lastly, megaproject planners also look to innovative finance and public-private partnerships as the silver bullet to
address project ills. We will highlight research where these approaches should be viewed with great caution as
they can create unintended consequences that exacerbate complex projects (Siemiatycki, 2009).
Participants: Karen Trapenberg Frick, Assistant Adjunct Professor, UC Berkeley and Co-Director, University of
California Transportation Center; Philip Plotch, Assistant Professor, Saint Peter’s University; Matti Siemiatycki,
Associate Professor, University of Toronto; and, Jan Whittington, Assistant Professor, University of Washington
References
 Capka, J. R. (2004) “Megaprojects – they are a different breed” Public Roads, 68 (1). Available at
https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/publicroads/04jul/01.cfm
 Flyvbjerg, B. (2014) What you should know about megaprojects and why: an overview. Project
Management Journal, 45(2), pp. 6–19.
 Pressman, J. and A. Wildavsky (1984) Implementation. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
 Siemiatycki, M. (2009). Delivering transportation infrastructure through public-private partnerships:
Planning concerns. Journal of the American Planning Association, 76(1), 43-58.
 Whittington, Jan (2012) “When to partner for public infrastructure? Transaction cost evaluation of
design-build delivery” Journal of the American Planning Association, 78(3), 269-285.

Abstract Index #: 843
MONITORING GENTRIFICATION IN THE TRANSIT-ORIENTED comminuty USING PERFORMANCE INDICATOR
Abstract System ID#: 1324
Poster
CHO, John [Southern California Association of Governments] choj@scag.ca.gov, presenting author, primary
author
WEN, Frank [Southern California Association of Governments] wen@scag.ca.gov

CHOI, Simon [SCAG] choi@scag.ca.gov
As required in California Senate Bill 375, Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) is being promoted as a major land
development tool to achieve the goal of reducing Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions in the 2012-35 Regional
Transportation Plan and Sustainable comminuty Strategy (RTP/SCS). Since TOD promotes mixed land
development near transit stations, transit can be more convenient while benefiting environment by reducing
VMT and air pollutant. TOD can also increase mobility to people who cannot or would not drive. Increased
mobility can help low-income people for their jobs and helps older residents for their daily activities (EPA, 2013).
While TOD is expected to bring benefits for environment and residents, there have been concerns about
gentrification and displacement as a result of TOD (Pollack et al, 2010). area around rail transit stations
particularly received concerns (Chapple, 2009). Kahn (2007) studied the changes in the Davis Square transit
station in Somerville, Massachusetts and concluded that after opening the transit station, residents of college
graduates increased more than 40 percent. Lin (2002) analyzed property values around transit stations in Chicago
and found that properties closer to transit stations increased significantly than surrounding area.
Several variables have been applied to analyze gentrification and displacement. Those variables include
Household income and property values (Kolko, 2007; Chapple, 2009; Lin, 2002; Baum-Snow and Kahn, 2005),
share of college educated residents (Kahn, 2007), and automobile ownership rates (Evans and Pratt, 2007).
Pollack et al. (2010) also applied population growth, changes in housing units, racial and ethnic diversity, and inmigration pattern in addition to the classical variables.
This study applies 2000 Census data and American Community Survey (ACS) 5 year data to analyze socioeconomic
characteristics of the residents in TOD area in Los Angeles County. Variables including household income,
education level, housing cost, car ownership, racial diversity, and population growth are selected to monitor
gentrification and displacement effect. The geographic unit of the analysis is census block group since it is the
smallest unit of Census data. Half mile boundaries around TOD area are identified to select the census black
groups around TOD area. A census block group is identified as TOD area when majority of the land of the census
block group is included in the half mile boundaries around transit stations. ANOVA is applied to test the statistical
significance of changes around transit stations over years.
The study demonstrates how Census data and ACS data can be used to monitor the changing socioeconomic
characteristics in selected TOD area. The study provides a better understanding of the linkage of TOD, transit
use, gentrification and displacement. The study is also useful for policy makers and planners to develop policy
and planning frameworks to minimize the negative  impact of TOD.
References
 Baum-Snow, N. and M. Kahn, 2005), Effects of urban rail transit expansions: Evidence from sixteen
cities, 1970-2000, Washington, DC: Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs.
 Chapple, K., 2009, Mapping susceptibility to gentrification: The early warning toolkit. Berkley, CA:
University of California Berkeley Center for Community Innovation.
 United States environment Protection Agency (EPA), 2013, Our Built and Natural Environments: A
Technical Review of the Interactions Among  land_use, Transportation, and environment Quality
 Evans, J. E. and R. H. Pratt, 2007, Traveler response to transportation system changes: Transit-oriented
development, Washington, DC: Transportation Research Board (Transit Cooperative Research Program
Report 95).
 Pollack, S, B. Bluestone, and C. Billingham, 2010, Maintaining Diversity in America’s Transit-Rich
Neighborhoods: Tools for Equitable Neighborhood Change, Dukakis Center for Urban and Regional
Policy.

Abstract Index #: 844
IS SHANGHAI SUBURBANIZED: INVESTIGATING THE CHANGES OF URBAN FORM OF SHANGHAI VIA SCHOOL
NEIGHBORHOODS

Abstract System ID#: 1360
Individual Paper
LIN, Lin [East China Normal University] linlin21@gmail.com
Rapid urban expansion has radically transformed urban landscape of Chinese city recently. It is believed that
mainland Chinese city have rapidly suburbanized. Schools, exerting an important influence on residential
location decisions and the demand for area housing, are one of the most ubiquitous institutions shaping city and
regional ecology, policy, and everyday experience. This study inquired if and how Shanghai is suburbanized by
investigating urban form of all elementary and middle schools of Shanghai. This study measured  land_use, street
network, and density within four buffers (100m, 200m, 400m, and 800m) of more than 1,200 elementary schools
and middle schools in Shanghai. Spatial and multivariate regression models were applied to examine the changes
of urban form of school neighborhood in Shanghai. Preliminary results showed that school neighborhood in old
city centers had more diverse  land_use and denser street networks.
References
 Cervero, R., Day, J., (2008). Suburbanization and transit-oriented development in China. transportation Policy
15, 315–323.
 Moudon, A.V., Lee, C., Cheadle, A.D., Garvin, C., Johnson, D., Schmid, T.L., Weathers, R., Lin, L., 2006.
Operational definitions of walkable neighborhood: Theoretical and empirical insights. Journal of Physical
Activity and Health 3, S99–S117.
 Chaskin, R.J., 1995. Defining neighborhood: History, theory, and practice. Chapin Hall Center for Children
at the University of Chicago.

Abstract Index #: 845
HOW SAFE IS THE MIXED  land_use: A CASE STUDY OF MIAMI-DADE COUNTY, FLORIDA
Abstract System ID#: 1373
Individual Paper
OUYANG, Yiqiang [University of Florida] yqouyang@gmail.com, presenting author, primary author
BEJLERI, Ilir [University of Florida] ilir@ufl.edu
Problem: According to American Planning Association (2012), “mixed-use developments include quality housing,
varied by type and price, integrated with shopping, schools, community facilities, and jobs”. In recent years,
planners have been advocating smart growth principles, promoting mixed  land_use development to battle urban
sprawl problems and build better comminuty. However, whether the mixed  land_use is beneficial or harmful to
transportation safety is a question that has not been well studied.
Existing Research: Many safety studies have looked at the influence of  land_use and other built environment
measures on traffic crashes. Most studies have studied specific  land_uses and crashes in isolation and have rarely
considered the  land_use mix index. Additionally, the widely used statistical methods in crash analysis are
inherently limited by assumptions and pre-defined underlying relationship between dependent and independent
variables.
Research Objective: This research aims at exploring the influence of mixed  land_use on traffic crashes by using a
spatial data mining method.
Methodology: This study uses a spatial data mining method to understand the relationship between crashes and
built environment and specifically the  land_use mix. The study uses the transportation D variables framework that
includes Density, Design, Diversity, Destination accessibility and Distance to transit. The Miami-Dade County area
in Florida is selected as case study. All the data, including crashes and  land_use are processed in GIS environment
at block group level. The  land_use mix index is calculated by using the entropy measure. The index is further
discretized to three categories: big, intermediate and small by using a quartile based fixed method, which is the
input for spatial association rule data mining method. The influence of mixed  land_use is mined for each crash

type such as property damage only (PDO) crashes, injury crashes, fatal crashes, pedestrian and bicycle crashes
and all crashes. Further, crashes for each type are divided into four groups by crash time based statistics analysis:
(1) 12am to 6am, (2) 7am to 11am, (3) 12pm to 6pm, and (4) 7pm to 11pm.
Results & Findings: Several interesting results emerge from this research. First, no rules were mined for the small
 land_use mix index for all types of crashes, regardless of crash time occurrence. This means that a low mixed land
use has no effect on crashes. Second, more rules were mined for the intermediate  land_use mix index than for the
big  land_use mix index. This was expected since the amount of intermediate  land_use mix was about twice as
much as big  land_use mix as determined by the discretization process. Third, although the number of rules for big
 land_use mix index was smaller than the intermediate  land_use mix index, the quality of these rules is not
necessarily lower. Generally, the maximum and the mean value of rule lift (greater lift values indicate stronger
associations) for rules containing big  land_use mix index are bigger than those that contain intermediate  land_use
mix index for all crashes and PDO crashes. This means that highly mixed  land_use may result in more total and
PDO crashes. On the contrary, the quality of rules containing the intermediate  land_use mix index is higher than
 land_use mix index for injury and pedestrian crashes. Fourth, the influence of mixed  land_use on crashes varies by
time. Statistically, more rules were mined for time group 2 and 3 than for time group 1 and 4, regardless of the
crash type. The corresponding rule quality also is higher. This is expected since the travel activity in group 2 and 3
is larger than in group 1 and 4.
Summary: This study presents a novel method to understand the influence of mixed  land_use on traffic crashes.
While the mixed  land_use can make comminuty more livable, this research suggest that the highly mixed land
use could increase the number of crashes and PDO crashes in a community, which may make the community
traffic unsafe. This calls for a balanced approach between livability and safety for planners and policy makers.
References
 American Planning Association. (2012). Policy Guide on Smart Growth.
 Cervero, R., Kockelman, K., 1997. Travel demand and the 3ds: Density, diversity, and design.
Transportation Research Part D-Transport and Environment 2 (3), 199-219
 Koperski, K., Han, J., 1995. Discovery of spatial association rules in geographic information databases.
Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Advances in Spatial Databases. Springer-Verlag, pp.
47-66.
 Kim, K., I. Brunner and E. Yamashita (2006). "Influence of  land_use, Population, Employment, and
Economic Activity on Accidents." Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation
Research Board (1953): 56-64.
 Jones, D. and M. K. Jha (2009). The Effect of Urban Form on Traffic Accident Incidence. Proceedings of
the 4th WSEAS international conference on Computer engineering and applications. Cambridge, USA,
World Scientific and Engineering Academy and Society (WSEAS): 212-222.

Abstract Index #: 846
HOW MULTI-LANE ONE WAY STREET DESIGN SHAPES LIFE CHANCES: COLLISIONS, CRIME AND COMMUNITY
Abstract System ID#: 1381
Individual Paper
GILDERBLOOM, John [University of Louisville] jigild01@louisville.edu, presenting author, primary author
RIGGS, William [California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo] wriggs@calpoly.edu
The livability of an inner-city neighborhood is greatly impacted by the design of the street. While recent moves
toward ‘complete streets’ policy throughout the United States have allowed for more funding to flow toward
bicycle and pedestrian oriented projects, many streets are still plagued by unsafe conditions We hypothesize that
some of this relates to multi-lane one-way streets, which exists primarily in downtown central business district
and nearby historic neighborhood many of which are mostly poor and minority. Our methods include three
principle strategies: 1) a cross-sectional city-wide evaluation using descriptive and inferential statistics on all
collisions occurring within a 5 year period in a mid-size city; 2) a focused assessment of traffic collision data,

crime data, counts of trees, housing valuation data, foreclosure and vacant and abandoned structures and lots on
a 13-block street segment with both one and two-way streets; and 3) a qualitative broken windows assessment
using photography evaluating signs of visual distress on one-way vs. two way segments. We find that one way
streets result in greater increase in collisions and injuries because of the increased speed. We also find
noticeable differences in neighborhood with one-ways having greater crime and abandonment; with a
significant reduction in appreciation in housing values. Furthermore our photographic assessment suggests that
these street typologies also may contribute to degradation and the erosion of community. This provides support
for an expanded thinking about how two-way street conversions may serve as a tool for increase greater
connectivity, community, and sustainability.
References
 Gilderbloom, John I., William W. Riggs, and Wesley L. Meares. 2015. “Does Walkability Matter? An
Examination of Walkability’s Impact on Housing Values, Foreclosures and Crime.” city 42, Part A
(February): 13–24. doi:10.1016/j.cities.2014.08.001.
 Hanka, M.J., J. Gilderbloom, and K. Plotnik. 2011. “How One-Way Streets Hurt Property Values and Lead
to Foreclosures.” In In Strother, S.C., & White, S. Eds. City Ranks: Living, Working and Doing Business in
the Best city in America. Los Altos, CA: IA Books.
 Jacobs, A., and D. Appleyard. 1987. “Toward an Urban Design Manifesto.” Journal of the American
Planning Association 53 (1): 112–20.
 Riggs, William. 2014. “Inclusively Walkable: Exploring the Equity of Walkable neighborhood in the San
Francisco Bay Area.” Local Environment. doi:10.1080/13549839.2014.982080
 Jacobs, A. B. 1993. Great Streets. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Abstract Index #: 847
SOCIAL PATH DEPENDENCE & DEVELOPMENT IN transportation PLANNING IN AUCKLAND, NEW ZEALAND
Abstract System ID#: 1382
Individual Paper
YIN, John [Massey University, New Zealand] johnyin47@gmail.com
PEARCE, Jane [University of Canterbury, New Zealand] jane.pearce@pg.canterbury.ac.nz
MUHAMMAD, Imran [Massey University] i.muhammad@massey.ac.nz
The failure to build a high-quality public transportation system in New Zealand city has its origins in institutional
challenges. One dimension of institutional challenges is limited opportunities for genuine public involvement,
especially immigrant comminuty in defining transportation problems and its solutions. New Zealand city have
become increasingly ethnically diverse, and, therefore, transportation planning policy can benefit from drawing
on the plurality of cultures and values that underpin the social fabric of ethnic comminuty. Growing Asian
population in Auckland provides an opportunity to transform automobile-dependent city into public transport
friendly city, as most Asian ride public transportation in their respective countries. The purpose of this paper is to
investigate the potential for transformative change by exploring everyday experiences and aspirations of
transport among Auckland’s Asian comminuty.
The research employs the concept of path dependence and development to identify current challenges and
possible future institutional change for the development of public transportation policy in Auckland. The social
dimension of path dependence and development investigates to what extent Asian comminuty’ voices have
been accommodated in different stages of transportation planning to detect path dependency. This research also
explores the opportunities of path dislocation by documenting everyday experience and aspirations of the city’s
Asian comminuty for public transport.
This paper reports data collected from social media and semi-structured interviews with Chinese and Indian-sub
continent comminuty to explore their everyday experience of public transportation in Auckland. The research
identifies communication, expectations and perception gaps between Asian users of existing and future public
transport system and institutional practices. This paper elucidates the socio-institutional context by identifying

path dependence in transportation planning in Auckland and documenting the way to dislocate path dependence in
favour of sustainable transportation planning.
References
 Blumenberg, E. (2008). Immigrants and transportation barriers to employment: The case of Southeast Asian
welfare recipients in California. transportation Policy, 15(1), 33-42.
 Burby, R.J. (2003). Making plans that matter: Citizen involvement and government action. Journal of the
American Planning Association, 69(1), 33-49.
 Chatman, D.G., & Klein, N.J. (2013). Why do immigrants drive less? Confirmations, complications, and
new hypotheses from a qualitative study in New Jersey, USA. transportation Policy, 30, 336-344.
 Qadeer, M.A. (1997). Pluralistic planning for multicultural city: the Canadian practice. Journal of the
American Planning Association, 63(4), 481-494.
 Sandercock, L. (2000b). When strangers become neighbours: Managing city of difference. Planning
Theory & Practice, 1(1), 13-30.

Track 15: Urban Design
Abstract Index #: 848
THE URBAN DESIGN STUDIO A PEDAGOGIC APPROACH TO URBAN SUSTAINABILITY: PROBLEM-BASED
SOLUTIONS FROM THE CLASSROOM TO THE COMMUNITY
Abstract System ID#: 7
Individual Paper
LARA, Jesus J [Ohio State University] lara.13@osu.edu
The urban design studio and university-community engagements have multiple goals. They include increasing
university responsiveness to local needs, stimulating real world change, and preparing students to effectively
address complex social challenges (Bourner 2010, Forester 1999). However, such approaches are complicated by
a variety of factors including stakeholder expectations, power imbalances, and conflicting goals between
educators and community members (Mansuri and Rao 2004). While the benefits of service learning program to
universities are well-documented, the experiences and benefits of such higher education partnerships to
community participants is not as well-known (Netshandama 2010). Successful engagements seem to require
community involvement and decision-making authority at every phase, mutual accountability and trust (Winkler
2013).This paper presents a series of case studies of community engagement and neighborhood empowerment
in the development of a collective sustainable urban design plan/vision for inner-city neighborhood. These
neighborhoods are located in Columbus, Ohio and they have seen tremendous decline in population and
economy over the past years.
The research team was challenged to ensure that the strategic vision was representative, and included the voices
and perspectives of previously marginalized residents. Accordingly, a comprehensive and multi-scale (house,
block, neighborhood, city) approach to outreach and engagement was developed. Additionally, a series of
educational workshops and outreach activities were conducted that involved different segments of the
population and diverse community groups in the identification of development priorities, a neighborhood health
assessment, and education and assistance for green home rehabilitation.
The project findings show the value of mutual learning and education between community and higher education
partners. Inner-city residents have diverse interests, wants, and needs that span many generations. Some of the
challenges are acute, but all are interconnected, making it difficult to prioritize. While the project activities and
documents reflect a community vision, there is ongoing need for participatory approaches where knowledge and
solutions are produced and shared among everyone involved to provide guidance for future development.

References
• Bourner, T. 2010. “A Compatible Partnership? Student-Community Engagement and Traditional
University Education.” Gateways: International Journal of Community Research and Engagement 3:139–
54.
• Forester, J. 1999. The Deliberative Practitioner. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
• Mansuri, G. and V. Rao. 2004. Community-based and driven development: A critical review.
• Netshandama, V. 2010. “Quality Partnerships: The Community Stakeholders’ View.” Gateways:
International Journal of Community Research and Engagement 3:70–87.
• Winkler, T. (2013). At the Coalface Community–University Engagements and Planning Education. Journal
of Planning Education and Research, 33(2), 215-227.

Abstract Index #: 849
SEPARATING THE PERSONAL, PROFESSIONAL AND POLITICAL: REALISING EFFECTIVE URBAN DESIGN REVIEW
ON TORONTO’S WATERFRONT
Abstract System ID#: 24
Individual Paper
WHITE, James [Glasgow] jamest.white@glasgow.ac.uk
Governing authorities commonly use design review to widen the availability of design expertise and raise the
design quality of new development (Paterson 2011; Punter 2011). Design review typically includes the critical
independent assessment of development proposals on behalf of the public planning authority either by a panel
of experts, planning officials, politicians, or some combination of the above (Scheer 1994). Local institutional
norms and jurisdictional limits mean there is no standard method of review; some design review processes are
mandatory, while others offer informal advice to decision-makers, and design review might be conducted at the
local, regional or even national level. In addition, when a panel of experts is involved in the review process,
membership might be limited to registered architects or open to a wide cross-section of built environment
professions. In some instances, especially at the neighbourhood level, the members of a design review panels can
also include local residents (Punter 2003).
The variability of design review means that its scope and effectiveness is often questioned. Design review
methods have faced criticism for being vague, capricious and arbitrary (Punter 2011), and academic researchers
have challenged the assumption that discretionary review processes necessarily lead to better outcomes than
traditional zoning (e.g. Nasar and Grannis 1999). In this paper, the case of the Waterfront Design Review Panel in
Toronto, Canada, is used to pinpoint some of the challenges associated with delivering effective design advice via
peer review. Established in 2005 by the Toronto Waterfront Revitalization Corporation (TWRC), the Waterfront
Design Review Panel was the first review body to be established in Toronto. A group of high profile built
environment professionals sit on the panel and offer non-binding advice on all waterfront redevelopment
projects, including masterplans, public realm improvements and new buildings. The research findings associated
with this paper are drawn from a content analysis of the design review panel’s meeting minutes between 2005
and 2008 and are further supported by a series of semi-structured interviews conducted with panel members,
presenting designers and representatives of the TWRC and the City of Toronto planning department.
The paper begins with a review of the literature and a categorisation of commonly employed design review
methods. Turning to the case of the Waterfront Design Review Panel, it tracks the development and evolution of
the waterfront panel’s procedures and evaluates the effectiveness of its advice through the lens of two major
projects. The paper argues that the review panel initially faced some of the criticisms associated with design
review, including that its advice could be arbitrary, that it lacked objectivity, and that political considerations and
personal whims were allowed to unduly influence the review process. The paper considers how the panel
responded to these criticisms and outlines the steps that were taken to improve the panel’s decision-making
procedures and its capacity to influence design outcomes.

Reflecting upon the categories of design review established at the start of the paper, the paper ends with a series
of lessons that focus on the future of peer-led design review. It is argued that, despite the positive role design
review can play as a mechanism of design governance, it remains a fragile discretionary tool. The paper contends
that further academic attention should focus on how the personalities and politics of individual panel members
and presenting designers can be mitigated during the design review process and whether collective peer
assessment, as practiced on Toronto’s waterfront, is the most effective method of reviewing urban design during
the planning approval process.
References
 Paterson, E. (2011). Design review in the UK: Its role in town planning decision making. Urban Design
International, 16 (2), pp. 94-104.
 Punter, J. (2003). From Design Advice to Peer Review: The Role of the Urban Design Panel in Vancouver.
Journal of Urban Design, 8 (2), pp. 113-135.
 Punter, J. (2011). Design Review – An Effective Means of Raising Design Quality? In: S. Tiesdell and D.
Adams, Urban Design and the Real Estate Development Process. Chichester, West Sussex: WileyBlackwell, pp. 182-198.
 Nasar, J.L. and Grannis, P. (1999). Design review reviewed: administrative vs. discretionary methods.
Journal of the American Planning Association, 65 (4), pp. 424-433.
 Scheer, B.C. (1994). Introduction: The Debate on Design Review. In: B.C. Scheer and W.F.E. Preiser (eds.),
Design Review: Challenging Urban Aesthetic Control. New York: Chapman and Hall, pp. 1-10.

Abstract Index #: 850
DECOMPOSING VISUAL PREFERENCE SURVEYS OF URBAN DESIGNS USING EYE-TRACKING
Abstract System ID#: 38
Individual Paper
NOLAND, Robert [Rutgers University] rnoland@rutgers.edu, presenting author, primary author
NELESSEN, Anton [Rutgers University] nelessen@rutgers.edu
WEINER, Marc [Rutgers University] mdw@ejb.rutgers.edu
COOK, Michael [University of Cincinnati] michael.cook@uc.edu
Visual preference surveys have been used for many years to elicit public perceptions of the desirability of
alternative urban development designs. These images are presented at public meetings and attendees are asked
to rank the desirability of alternative images. Often these will contrast typical sprawl landscapes, i.e., surface
parking, strip-malls, and dense traffic scenes, with “livable” community elements, such as pedestrians, walkable
streetscapes, and light-rail transit. Generally, participants find the less sprawling images less desirable; however,
it is not clear what specific components of the images affect those rankings. This research is aimed at
decomposing the details of community images and linking these to the rankings that are given to them.
Methodologically, we use eye-tracking technology to record fixations and eye-movements associated with
images that have been shown to a convenience sample using an on-screen computer survey. Correlations
between the image rankings, eye fixations and movements, and the specific elements of interest in the image are
cross-analyzed to determine how individual elements in an urban development may affect the desirability of its
image. For example, do our respondents fixate on the presence of people on the street? on “green”
transportation modes (light-rail or bicycles)? on elements of new urbanist architecture? Likewise, are longer
fixations associated with “undesirable” elements, such as parking, traffic, or images of sprawl? The results of our
research provide information for planners, developers, and architects to understand how best to craft desirable
developments, with urban design characteristics that people find preferable, while avoiding less preferred
features. The research also provides information on the process of soliciting visual preference data; what
components of the images do people fixate on? This can provide a unique understanding of better ways to design
visual preference surveys, for use in future research and planning practice.

References
 Lenzner, Timo, Lars Kaczimirek, and Mirta Galesic, 2011, Seeing through the eyes of the respondent: An
eye-tracking study on survey question comprehension, International Journal of Opinion Research, 23(3):
361-373.
 Zheng, Bin, Yaoqi Zhang and Jiquan Chen, 2011, Preference to home landscape: wildness or neatness?,
Landscape and urban_planning, 99: 1-8.
 Van den Berg, Agnes E., and Sander L. Koole, 2006, New wilderness in the Netherlands: An investigation
of visual preferences for nature development landscapes, Landscape and urban_planning, 78: 362-372.
 Ode, Asa, Mari S. Tveit, and Gary Fry, 2008, Capturing landscape visual character using indicators:
Touching base with landscape aesthetic theory, Landscape Research, 33(1): 89-117.
 Ewing, Reid, 2001, Using a visual preference survey in transit design, Public Works Management, 5: 270279.

Abstract Index #: 851
PERSPECTIVES ON DESIGN GOVERNANCE: CURRENT TRAJECTORIES AND NEW DIRECTIONS
Abstract System ID#: 97
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session
WHITE, James [Glasgow] jamest.white@glasgow.ac.uk
BRODY, Jason [Kansas State University] jbrody@ksu.edu
FARHAT, Ramzi [California State Polytechnic University, Pomona] rrfarhat@csupomona.edu
LINOVSKI, Orly [University of Manitoba] linovski@ucla.edu
RYAN, Brent [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] bdr@mit.edu
Since the early 1970s, studies of design review and development management have been an important sub-focus
within the urban design discipline (e.g. Barnett 1974; Scheer and Preiser 1994; Punter and Carmona 1997). The
term ‘design governance’ is increasingly employed to describe the suite of ‘second order’ (George 1997) tools and
mechanisms that can be used to regulate for design quality during the planning process. Research on design
governance has catalogued the growth of discretionary tools, such as design review, public participation and
design competitions and, perhaps paradoxically, the parallel rise of prescriptive control mechanisms, like formbased codes and historic preservation guidelines. The literature has shown, among other things, that clear,
transparent and consistent design governance procedures can improve the quality of design outcomes. Yet, it has
also demonstrated that design control and review mechanisms can easily be manipulated, lead to arbitrary
decisions and stifle creative freedom.
Observing that the design governance research agenda is increasingly fragmented, with scholars largely focused
on the evaluation of discrete design tools and mechanisms, this roundtable will critically explore recent advances
in design review and development management and debate the future role(s) of urban design as a city building
tool. The roundtable will also be premised on the idea that the context for design governance has shifted over
the past decade (White 2015). The 2007-08 financial crisis led to unprecedented cuts in many municipal budgets
and slowed investment in the real estate development sector. The lacklustre economic recovery has put further
pressure on the regulatory framework for design and precipitated a tendency towards ‘commonplace’ solutions
and unreflective practices that are too often focused solely on economic growth. Decision-making continues to
be hampered by subservience to real estate prerogatives, a reliance on ‘big architecture’ design solutions and an
undue emphasis on building aesthetics over morphological form and function.
Yet, at the same time, new avenues for progressive design governance are emerging and the actors and
institutions involved shaping design outcomes continue to evolve and change. The spectre of climate change has
inspired some governing authorities to embrace green planning solutions and create opportunity spaces for
enhanced design governance via initiatives that support suburban retrofitting, city centre regeneration and
ecological urban infrastructure, such as green roofs and wildlife corridors. Equally, the role that local people can
play in design decision-making is expanding in new and exciting ways. Formal methods like the ‘charrette’ are
becoming more and more ubiquitous, while radical initiatives, such as guerrilla urbanism and other citizen-led

projects, are challenging the traditional regulatory context for design governance and forcing urban designers to
reassess their expert role in the planning process.
Reflecting on these various themes, roundtable participants will be encouraged to draw upon theory and
empirical research to consider the current trajectories and new directions of design governance by addressing
the following, broadly defined, questions:
1.

What are the main challenges faced by planners and urban designers involved in design governance?

2.

How can design governance help to create locally meaningful, adaptive and resilient places?

3.

To what extent can design governance balance public and private sector professional expertise and local
community knowledge?

4.

Must design governance always be driven by the public sector if it is to be successful?

5.

Are accepted methods of design governance (e.g. design review, design codes, design guidance) still
relevant in today’s practice, or are new tools and mechanisms (re)shaping the institutional landscape of
design decision-making?

References
 Barnett, J. (1974). Urban Design as Public Policy: Practical Methods for Improving city. New York:
Architectural Record.
 George, R.V. (1997). A procedural explanation for contemporary urban design. Journal of Urban Design,
2 (2), pp. 143-161.
 Punter, J. and Carmona, M. (1997). The Design Dimension of Planning: Theory, content and best
practice. London: E & FN Spon.
 Scheer, B.C. and Preiser, W.F.E. (eds.). (1994). Design Review Reviewed: Challenging Urban Aesthetic
Control. New York: Chapman & Hall.
 White, J.T. (2015). Future directions in urban design as public policy: Reassessing best practice principles
for design review and development management. Journal of Urban Design, forthcoming.

Abstract Index #: 852
WHAT ARE URBAN DESIGN METHODOLOGIES?
Abstract System ID#: 112
Individual Paper
RIEKES TRIVERS, Ian [University of Michigan] ianrt@umich.edu, presenting author, primary author
FISHMAN, Robert [University of Michigan] fishmanr@umich.edu
While many leading scholars in the area of physical planning and urban design continue to call for “putting the
physical back in planning” and reemphasizing the centrality of the production of urban form (Talen & Ellis, 2002),
the role of urban design research and its range of methodologies continue to fit awkwardly in the realm of
scholarship and pedagogy of urban_planning. As an illustration, the 430 page manuscript Research Methods in
Urban and Regional Planning (Wang & Vom Hofe, 2007) mentions urban design only once on the second page. A
debate over the relationship between urban_planning and design flares up every few years, such as in a
commentary and series of responses the June 2011 issue of the Journal of Planning Education and Research
(Gunder, 2011). Urban design is often seen by urban_planning academics as the province of architects, landscape
architects or “designers”, despite its deep historical links to planning and its central role in the production of
urban space and experience. For many the term “design” becomes a catchall for any physical planning research
that does not adhere to a post-positivist epistemology.

This paper seeks to contribute to and reinvigorate this important debate about urban design methodology in
relation urban_planning scholarship. There are three primary questions addressed in the paper. First, what are
the best examples of good urban design research? Second, what research methods do these examples employ?
Third, how does urban design research relate to dominant research paradigms in planning more generally? By
reviewing the range of good urban design research (research that is impactful, meaningful to the understanding
and practice of urban_planning), cataloging the methods used and relating them to the dominant research
paradigms today this research concludes that a wider recognition of urban design methodologies should be
accepted in planning research and pedagogy. A more open stance to urban design methodology, a “catholic
approach” that draws on the insights of multiple disciplines and epistemological stances (Moudon, 1992), can
invigorate urban_planning research and pedagogy - and help put the physical back in planning.
References
 Talen, E., & Ellis, C. (2002). Beyond Relativism: Reclaiming the Search for Good City Form. Journal of
Planning Education and Research, 22(1), 36–49.
 Wang, X., & Vom Hofe, R. (2007). Research Methods in Urban and Regional Planning. Beijing: Tsinghua
University Press.
 Gunder, M. (2011). Commentary: Is Urban Design Still urban_planning? An Exploration and Response.
Journal of Planning Education and Research, 31(2), 184–195.
 Moudon, A. V. (1992). A Catholic Approach to Organizing What Urban Designers Should Know. Journal of
Planning Literature, 6(4), 331–349.

Abstract Index #: 853
RESTORING LOST DENSITY: INFILL DEVELOPMENT INSPIRED BY LOCAL HISTORY
Abstract System ID#: 128
Individual Paper
WHITTEMORE, Andrew [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] awhittemore@gmail.com
Decades of speculative commercial development, renewal, and policy to expand parking facilities and roads
have reduced the dense, mixed use centers of the 19th and early 20th century suburbs into monotonous, autooriented, under-utilized commercial centers. One strategy in increasing the supply of housing and other uses in
inner suburbs is to target it towards these commercial centers. These policy can, however, face criticism for
promoting development that is too dense or not consistent with the character of the town. In order to
demonstrate the consistency of infill with community character, this paper explores the possibility of taking a
historically-inspired approach to infill by assessing the extent of lost residential and commercial density in these
centers. It also explores the considerations necessary in creating design guidelines that will make new
construction referential to lost commercial and residential architecture. The paper uses a case study of
Watertown Square in the Boston suburb of Watertown, Massachusetts.

Abstract Index #: 854
FOUR URBAN DESIGN PARADIGMS IN LISBON, PORTUGAL - LESSONS ON LIVABILITY AND PLACE MAKING
Abstract System ID#: 133
Individual Paper
DEL RIO, Vicente [California State Polytechnic University, San Luis Obispo] vdelrion@calpoly.edu
Portugal’s admission to the European Community in 1986 led to international repositioning and investments in
urban design and livability. This paper discusses four dominant urban design paradigms in the shaping of Lisbon,
how they reflected international movements, and their lessons for the future.
The first paradigm was born from the need to restore Lisbon’s downtown devastated by the 1755 earthquake.
Reconstruction followed Illuminist ideals including a regular grid pattern over the medieval tissue improving

connectivity, respecting pre-existing public spaces, and providing a monumental identity while imposing
architectural and earthquake-resistant building guidelines (Santos, 2000). Known as the Baixa Pombalina the area
is a top tourist attraction and a candidate to UNESCO’s World Heritage Site status. However, it suffers from
depopulation, the growth of tourist-oriented” uses, and the expensive challenges of architectural preservation.
The second paradigm resulted from federal projects to handle urban growth and public housing in late 1930s
under the military dictatorship. Alvadade, for instance, a neighborhood for 45,000 residents was based on the
neighborhood-unit with a pedestrian network, a mix of walk-up and high-rise apartment buildings with retail in
the ground floor, and public facilities (Costa, 2002). It represents the passage from “culturalist” to “modernist”
urbanism, and became a very desirable neighborhood perfectly integrated to the urban fabric.
Portugal’s current repositioning in the global scene led to a third urban design paradigm represented by the 1998
World Exposition and the subsequent redevelopment of a 120-acre area and its 3.1 miles of riverfront by the
Tagus River. According to Lisbon’s 1995 master plan, the event would be the catalyst for a new district that would
provide the city with a new centrality (Craveiro, 1997). The infrastructure built for the fair would support this goal
such as a new bridge across the Tagus, a new subway line with seven stations, an iconic multi-modal
transportation hub designed by Santiago Calatrava, and the realignment of the waterfront. Named Parque das
Nacoes, the new district became Lisbon’s most important real estate operation including a premier business
district; parks, recreational uses and restaurants along the waterfront; and an estimated population of 25,000
people. Showcasing modernity and internationalism the area became a tourist destination but remains exclusive
to the upper-middle class and is disconnected from the distressed surroundings.
The forth paradigm corresponds to the current planning efforts to regenerate the historical centers in Lisbon and
much of Portugal which, in part, reflect funding from the European Community (Balsas, 2007). These are based in
programs and projects for economic regeneration, livability, and place making. In Lisbon, this paradigm is
reflected in the city’s 2010 strategic plan (CML, 2010). To position the city as Europe’s Atlantic capital, the plan
identified development opportunities and calls for the integration of planning, urban design, social, cultural, and
historic program, within a framework of creative innovation, livability, sustainability, regeneration of the existing
urban fabric, and public participation. However the economic, social, and cultural limitations imposed on the
building stock and the city fabric by centuries of overlapping historical layers are enormous.
Although in the late 1970s Portugal overturned a long period of oppressive centralized regimes what followed redemocratization was fragmentation of public powers and responsibilities. In the last decade, Portugal's desire to
become a global player together with imperatives from the European Community has lead to a governance of
more integrated and strategic decision making as well as participatory processes. Within this framework, future
planning and urban design efforts in Lisbon as well as in the US and elsewhere, can learn important lessons on
livability and place making from the four paradigms discussed herein.
References
 Balsas, Carlos. 2007. City Centre Revitalization in Portugal: A Study of Lisbon and Porto. In Journal of
Urban Design 12 (2).
 CML - Camara Municipal de Lisboa. 2010. Sentir Lisboa. Lisboa: Camara Municipal.
 Costa, Joao Pedro. 2002. Bairro de Alvalade: Um Paradigma do Urbanismo Portugues. Lisbon: Horizonte.
 Craveiro, Teresa. 1994. Breve Sintese da Politica Urbanistica Municipal na Zona Ribeirinha de Lisboa. In
Revista Mediterraneo # 10/11. Universidade Nova de Lisboa.
 Santos, Maria Helena Ribeiro dos. 2000. A Baixa Pombalina – Passado e Futuro. Lisbon: Horizonte.

Abstract Index #: 855
ENVISIONING MASDAR CITY: FROM UTOPIAN TO ADAPTIVE PLANNING
Abstract System ID#: 138
Individual Paper
WAGLE, Gaurish [Masdar] gwagle@masdar.ae

ALAWADI, Khaled [Masdar Institute of Science and Technology] khaled.alawadi@yahoo.com, presenting author
MAGHELAL, Praveen [Masdar Institute] pmaghelal@masdar.ac.ae, primary author
Planning has been at the forefront of discussion to deal with urban ills of health, crime, congestion, pollution and
safety and security in urban area. No doubt, planning has become one of the critical approaches to sustainable
communities. Several planning and design approaches ranging from Ebenezer Howard’s “The Town-Country
Magnet” to Peter Calthorpe’s “Pedestrian Pocket” have inspired the recent movements of Smart Growth, New
Urbanism, and urban metabolism in planning. These movements recommend development forms that support
the principles of sustainability such as the compact mixed-use developments, reduced auto-dependency,
increased use of walking and biking, better connectivity to public transportation, and higher densities. The
emergence of the sustainable development concept in 1987 brought with it a new frontier aimed to restore the
role of urban design in promoting sustainable development. Sustainable development, as it pertains to urban
design, is mostly about the form (the morphology of the built environment). Which “form” a city should take and
which attributes shape its society are “ancient questions” (Lynch, 1981, 73). However urban design is also a set of
relationships and flows controlled by technical and socio-economic processes (Kenedy et.al, 2010; Ferrao and
Fernandez, 2014).
Such processes have inspired the developments of the seaside community in Florida that have adapted and
implemented several sustainable urban form strategies. However such developments cannot be classified as
‘Sustainable comminuty”. Masdar City, in Abu Dhabi, UAE, is one of the first examples of new urbanist and ecobalanced sustainable planning approach implementation. This is not unique as several other regions have
planned similar sustainable city which is yet to be implemented.
Envisioned by Norman Foster, Masdar City, one of the world’s first sustainable city incorporated both principles
of new urbanism and eco-balanced design applications to make it self-sustaining. Masdar City has been planned
as the “green print” for sustainable urban development, and recently as a strategic business hub. The utopian
plan housed in 700-hectares (2.7 sq. miles) accommodates 40,000 residents and 50,000 commuters with 1,500
businesses, and seven international institutions including Siemens, IRENA, GE, and Mitsubishi. Using advanced
technology energy-efficient structures, renewable energy sources, waste management, water management, and
oil-free transportation, it ensures carbon neutrality and more environmently responsive urban setting (Masdar
City, 2009).
In terms of mobility, Masdar City was envisioned with no cars and only pedestrian mode of travel. The
superstructure of high density mixed used were on raised platform with services and infrastructure, freeing the
surface from vehicular movement. It was to be served by a network of approximately 26 miles of automated
battery driven personal rapid transit (PRT). The LRT system connected the individuals of the city to the adjacent
cultural and recreation districts of Saadiayat Island and Yas Island. The Metro connected the city to the Abu Dhabi
International Airport and the CBD of Abu Dhabi.
Driven by advancement in technology, change in fiscal standing of the city, and better understanding of success
and failure of the sustainable approaches, the city during the 2008 economic decline has modified its originally
proposed sustainable “utopian” planning approach to a sustainable “adaptive” planning approach. Although the
original vision of Norman’s plan still exists, the modified plan embraces the required adaptation to meet the
needs of changing demographics’ social, economic, and environment understanding of the place. The new plan
uses the lessons learnt from the utopian plan and has implemented changes in its  land_use, transportation and
energy elements of the plan. This presentation discussion the lesson learnt and adaptable changes in the new
plan.
References
 Lynch, K. (1960). The image of the city. The MIT Press
 Kenedy, C,. Pincetl, S,. Bunje, P. (2010). The study of urban metabolism and its applications to urban
planning and design. environment Pollution, 159(7), pp. 1965-1973
 Ferrão, P., and Fernández J. E. (2013). Sustainable Urban Metabolism. The MIT Press
 Masdar City: The city of possibilities (2009). Masdar, Abu Dhabi, UAE.

Abstract Index #: 856
RECOVERING CHINA'S AGRICULTURAL AND WATER LANDSCAPES RECONFIGURING RURAL TO URBAN BUILT
TYPOLOGIES
Abstract System ID#: 143
Individual Paper
BASSETT, Shannon [University at Buffalo, SUNY] shannonbassettarchitecture@gmail.com
Within the context of China’s New Urbanization strategy, this paper examines the possibilities for China’s
landscape and ecological recovery in the face of its previous Urbanization’s deterioration of ecology and cultural
identity. In opposition to China’s recent previous urban development strategies, a renewed relationship between
nature and culture through new models of urbanization operate at the intersection of urban design, planning and
ecological system. These include the reconfiguring rural to urban built typologies having the agency to be
transformative, in addition to the reinsertion and embedding of everyday social and cultural practices and
processes in China within public space in Chinese city.
Additionally, China’s recent urbanization has been explosive. In an inversion which first began with its opening up
again to world market forces in 1978 with Economic Reform under Deng Xiaoping, it is projected that China’s
population will transition from 80% rural and 20% urban, to 80% urban and 20% rural by the year 2050.
Consequently, the massive construction and development projects that this phenomenon has prompted have
had a significant impact on valuable agricultural lands. These have been eaten up for development. The
transferring of land for development is immediately more profitable for Municipalities and local leaders then it’s
past  land_use of food production. Of significance, in a country with a strong and rich agricultural landscape that
used to be self-sustaining.
The recent Eco-city project in China initially presented the potential to address a number of issues of
sustainability. While these have done so in part, primarily at the building system scale it can be critiqued that
they have been lacking in an entirely integrative sustainable and meaningful public space. Their construction and
development have, in some cases, actually undermined their actual landscapes and the eco-systems services,
which they provide. While recent trends in Western city have begun to adopt urban agriculture as strategies,
China’ city continue to adopt more City Beautiful movement approach to its landscapes.
This paper explores possible alternative building typologies, which take the valuable qualities and characteristics
of rural building typologies and reconfigure them into urban ones. It explores their potential to create hybrid
programs and typologies, which can create opportunities for urban agriculture. It does so through the analysis
and discussion of selected case studies. This includes design research, in addition to analyzing the results of an
urban design studio run in collaboration between Chinese and US students run by me, which examined
alternative methods for urban development using the Tianjin Chinese Eco-city as a lens to do so. The studio
examined alternative solutions to the prevailing prescriptive zoning and building massing and spacing, which are
conducive to creating the Modernist tower in a park model in Chinese city. The studio also re-examined the role
of ecology in the design through integrated landscape and ecological planning as a methodology. Further, the
studio looked at the possibilities of activating the spaces in between the buildings as productive landscape, which
might include harvesting water collection, producing energy, in addition to creating productive urban landscapes.
It examines these strategies across a spectrum of design scales: the building envelope; master planning and their
integration to larger landscape and ecological system of design.
In conclusion, this paper offers possible new models for rural building typologies reconfigured as new urban ones,
addressing issues of food security and the recovery of China’s agricultural and water landscapes, in addition to
positing how these provide new possibilities for re-inserting and re-embedding everyday social and cultural
practices and processes in Chinese city.

Abstract Index #: 857
DESIGNING THE ENTREPRENEURIAL CITY: COMPETITION, GROWTH AND THE PRACTICE OF URBAN DESIGN
Abstract System ID#: 157
Individual Paper
LINOVSKI, Orly [University of Manitoba] linovski@ucla.edu
In examining recent changes in urban form and structure, there has been an interest in how entrepreneurial
governance strategies – marked by a focus on competition, outside investment, and promotion – are re-shaping
urban space (Hall & Hubbard, 1998). The role of urban design in facilitating, or even initiating, entrepreneurial
strategies can be significant. Hubbard (1996) has argued that architecture and urban design play a key role in
“lubricating” the transition to the entrepreneurial city model through a new urban aesthetic premised on
consumption and tourism. The entrepreneurial model is seen as leading to a form of urban design characterized
as piecemeal, opportunistic and project-oriented, prioritizing the “proactive pursuit of real-estate investments
through financial incentives, ‘deal-making’ and megaprojects” (Kipfer & Keil, 2002, p. 243).
Fundamentally, the entrepreneurial city model is based on the idea of a shift in the orientation of local strategies:
city governments once charged with providing services for residents are now focused on creating market-based
strategies to attract investment. While this re-orientation is the premise for understandings of entrepreneurial
urban design (see, for example, Biddulph, 2011; Gospodini, 2002), there has been little empirical research
demonstrating that city’ approach to shaping built form and urban design has changed over time. While there is
support for contemporary practices fitting within the entrepreneurial model, there is less known about whether
this represents a break with previous urban design practices or follows an existing pattern of practices. This work
addresses this important gap by focusing on three key questions:
(1) To what extent do contemporary urban design plans and projects display an orientation towards
entrepreneurial strategies?
(2) Are entrepreneurial urban design strategies observed in historic design plans and projects? How do
these differ from contemporary forms of urban design practice?
(3) How can differences in entrepreneurial urban design strategies between eras inform our understanding
of urban design practices?
This paper uses a mixed method approach that draws on critical discourse analysis of urban design plans
combined with interviews and archival research. Focusing on two city with significantly different urban design
cultures – Toronto and Los Angeles – this work analyzes urban design plans from the post-war period to
contemporary times in light of their orientation towards entrepreneurial strategies of design. Preliminary findings
show that while contemporary urban design practices clearly align with the entrepreneurial city model, similar
discourses of growth, investment and competition shaped early instances of urban design plans and projects to
varying extents. This paper will explore the need for a more nuanced approach to understanding urban design
practices in the context of the entrepreneurial city model and the implications for urban design practitioners and
scholars.
References
 Biddulph, M. (2011). Urban design, regeneration and the entrepreneurial city. Progress in Planning, 76,
63-103.
 Gospodini, A. (2002). European city in competition and the new 'uses' of urban design. Journal of
Urban Design, 7(1), 59-73.
 Hall, T., & Hubbard, P. (Eds.). (1998). The entrepreneurial city: Geographies of politics, regime and
representation. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
 Hubbard, P. (1996). Urban design and city regeneration: Social representations of entrepreneurial
landscapes. Urban Studies, 33(8), 1441.



Kipfer, S., & Keil, R. (2002). Toronto inc? Planning the competitive city in the new Toronto. Antipode,
34(2), 227-264.

Abstract Index #: 858
BEYOND CONTEMPORARY SUSTAINABLE URBANISM: URBAN RENEWAL THROUGH MEGASTRUCTURE
DEMOLITION
Abstract System ID#: 191
Poster
KIM, Chung Ho [University of Washington] charisut@uw.edu
Contemporary sustainable urbanism including Smart Growth, New Urbanism, and LEED-ND (Leadership in Energy
and environment Design for Neighborhood Development) has a strong belief of urban agglomeration that high
density development is basically a good urban development method. This is thought to be a result of reflecting
existing practices of pervasive suburban developments in America. Under the context, this paper explores a new
trend of urban renewal through megastructure demolition, which shows an opposite way from the contemporary
sustainable urbanism. The recent and striking trend in revitalizing old and dilapidated urban centers aims at
development of emptiness rather than that of fill-up. In other words, it puts people ahead of built environments.
For this, old and expired megastructures which were used as vital infrastructures are demolished. Then, new and
relaxed urban spaces are provided for their rests, amusements, and activities.
For this research, the paper takes three major steps: First, the paper addresses the recent trend of urban renewal
through megastructure demolition. Second, the paper conducts a case study with two extreme planning projects
in Seoul, Korea and Seattle, US. Finally, the paper identifies what pros and cons each planning project has. More
specifically, the two extreme planning projects are Seoul’s Cheong-gye-cheon Restoration Project, and Seattle’s
Alaskan Way Viaduct Demolition and the Replacement Tunnel Construction. They have same purpose of urban
renewal and similar physical solution of megastructure demolition. However, they are also quite different in
terms of background (key figure and main event), decision making (top-down and bottom-up), and
implementation process (cost and speed), which were considered to originate from cultural difference between
Seoul and Seattle. As a result, they will show that this trend is global, but the details are somewhat different.
The first case, Seoul’s Cheong-gye-cheon Restoration Project, is currently respected as a globally successful
project because it was fast, effective, and ecological in revitalizing Seoul’s old downtown. It demolished old
concrete structures which had been used as viaduct since it was built in 1970s. It provided urban waterfront park
ranging about 6 km, just with the construction period of 27 months, July 2003- October 2005. Meanwhile, the
actual cost was KRW 386.7 billion or US $281 million. The second case, Seattle’s Alaskan Way Viaduct Demolition
and the Replacement Tunnel Construction, is an ongoing project which demolishes the Seattle Alaskan Way
Viaduct, replace it with a new underground tunnel, and provide new waterfront in Elliott Bay. The bored tunnel is
being built by using a tunnel-boring machine called Bertha which has a record-breaking diameter borer of 17.5m.
The construction started in 2011 October, and is currently expected to be completed in 2019. The initial
estimated budget was US $42.5 billion, but the actual cost is anticipated to be increased.
To sum up, the paper aims not only to comprehend the global trend of urban renewal through megastructure
demolition, but also to raise the cultural awareness in the era of globalization. Finally, the paper expects to
provide a good chance to ask what kinds of urban renewal developments will be appropriate and good for
today’s sustainable and resilient urban environments.
References
 Jabareen, Y. (2006). Sustainable Urban Forms. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 26, 1, 38-52.
 The Seoul Development Institute. (2006). Cheonggyecheon bogwon saeop baekseo [Cheonggyecheon
Restoration Project White Paper]. Seoul, Korea: City of Seoul.
 Rowe, P. G. (2010). The Cheonggyecheon Restoration Project: A City and Its Stream. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Graduate School of Design.




United States. (2012). The Alaskan Way Viaduct Replacement Program: Replacing the Alaskan Way
Viaduct. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration.
Washington State. (2013). Alaskan Way Viaduct Replacement Program 2013. Olympia, Wash.:
Washington State Department of Transportation.

Abstract Index #: 859
DESIGNING PARKS WITH SENIORS IN MIND
Abstract System ID#: 223
Individual Paper
LOUKAITOUSIDERIS, Anastasia [UCLA] sideris@ucla.edu
Central Theme: Senior citizens remain a highly underserved group in regards to parks. This despite the fact that
studies find a positive relation between physical and emotional well-being and spending time in a natural setting.
Studies have also shown that physical activity that is tailored to the needs of participants can benefit even the
oldest and most frail senior citizens. Researchers have argued that a regular physical activity regimen among the
elderly may even slow the aging process. Despite the strong link between walking and physical activity and
health, older adults represent the most inactive portion of the population. We know little about the needs and
preferences of different elderly groups in regards to neighborhood open space or the influence of objective and
subjective features of the neighborhood built environment (e.g., walkable streets, availability and proximity of
parks and recreational facilities, availability of exercise equipment, pedestrian amenities including sidewalks or
footpaths, adequate lighting, and intersection crossing features; aesthetics such as foliage, pleasant scenery) on
the physical activity patterns of different elderly groups.
The relative lack of research is accompanied by a complete lack of recreational and park facilities designed with
the needs of the elderly in mind in Los Angeles and other US city. In contrast, city like Shanghai and Taipei
have retrofitted their parks with exercise equipment geared towards the elderly, while London opened its first
playground for seniors in May 2010 at Hyde Park, equipped with low-impact fitness machines. It is clear that the
US lags behind when it comes to identifying the open space-, passive- and active recreation needs of its elderly
Research Questions and Methodology. The study will start addressing these issues by responding to the following
research questions.
1.

What are the senior citizens’ needs, preferences, and aspirations in regards to neighborhood parks and
how do they differ in terms of gender, racial/cultural characteristics, and health status?

2.

What are the challenges and impediments that often decrease seniors’ access to neighborhood parks?

3.

What do planners need to know in order to plan and design senior-friendly parks? What are appropriate
design guidelines for such parks?

To respond to these questions the study draws from both primary and secondary sources as well as an overview
of specific open spaces built in different parts of the world for seniors. Primary sources included eight focus
groups with ethnically diverse seniors at St. Barnabas Senior Citizen Center in Los Angeles, and interviews with
nine representatives of local nonprofits, and state and federal agencies focusing on issues related to aging and
open spaces. Secondary sources included a detailed scanning and examination of the scholarly literature on the
open space needs of seniors, as well as published design guidelines on healing gardens and therapeutic
landscapes, and tool kits and manuals about the design of age-friendly city.
References
 Cooper Marcus, C. and Barnes, M. (1999). Healing Gardens: Therapeutic Benefits and Design
Recommendations. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
 Cooper Marcus, C. and Sachs, N. (2014). Therapeutic Landscapes. New York: John Wiley and Sons.





Stafford, P. (2009). Elderberbia: Aging with a Sense of Place in America. Santa Barbara California: Praege
World Health Organization (2007). Global Age-Health city: A Guide. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO Press.
King, AC and King, DK (2010) "Physical Activity for an Aging Population" Public Health Reviews. 32(2):
401-426.

Abstract Index #: 860
URBAN FORM AND RETAIL CENTER SUSTAINABILITY
Abstract System ID#: 244
Individual Paper
BANAI, Reza [University of Memphis] rbanai@memphis.edu
Location is commonly axiomatically stated as the most important real estate feature. However, the risky real
estate sector—retail—is commonly considered at a spatial scale—e.g. traffic analysis zone, census tract, or
metropolitan-wide area—so coarse that little, if any, is revealed about urban form characteristics that likely
influence the viability or sustainability of the retail store at a particular, site-specific location. While the
significance of “location” is well-known in real estate discourse, little attention is given to the urban system that
reveals how location is configured, and how that configuration sustains the viability of retailing activity in the
metropolitan region. In this paper, we use block-level, GIS-aided spatial data that reveal the physical qualities of
the retail center's built environment—its  land_use mix, its accessibility from nearby housing and elsewhere in the
region in a nodal location—as well as its employment and business activity. Thereby, we examine a hypothesis
that retailing viability is linked to urban form and set out to determine a statistical relationship. Retail sales data
are used to indicate the viability and sustainability of businesses in the retail center. Two nodal locations of retail,
urban vs. suburban, anchored by an identical big-box retailer downsized to a neighborhood store with
pedestrian-friendly orientation and proximity to housing, were matched. The paper concludes with regression
estimates of the urban-form determinants of business viability by various distances from the retail center.
References
 Banai, R (1998) The New Urbanism: An Assessment of the Core Commercial area, with Perspectives
from (Retail) Location and  land_use Theories, and the Conventional Wisdom, Environment and Planning
B: Planning and Design 25: 169-185
 Berry, B J L (1963) Commercial structure and commercial blight (University of Chicago Press, Chicago)
 Brown S (1991) Retail location: the post hierarchical challenge. International Review of Retail,
Distribution and Consumer Research 1: 367-381
 Cervero, R and Duncan, M (2006) Which Reduces Vehicle Travel More: Jobs-Housing Balance or RetailHousing Mixing? Journal of the American Planning Association, 72 (4): 475-490
 Cortright, J (2009) Walking the Walk--How Walkability Raises Home Values in U.S. city (CEOs for city)

Abstract Index #: 861
RESIDENTIAL SATISFACTION OF CHILDREN IN MASS HOUSING
Abstract System ID#: 274
Individual Paper
SEVERCAN, Yucel [Middle East Technical University] csevercan@yahoo.com, presenting author, primary author
BARLAS, Adnan [Middle East Technical University] barlas@metu.edu.tr
Residential satisfaction is a significant topic in environment psychology, urban design and housing yet there is
little research on residential satisfaction among children. Although a few scholars, such as Severcan (2012),
examined children’s place attachment (a construct that is positively correlated with residential satisfaction) in
historical districts that were slated for urban regeneration, we know little about the effects of living in mass
housing developments on children’s place satisfaction. This research aims to understand the residential
satisfaction of children living in mass housing, which were built in the context of squatter housing regeneration.

More specifically, we asked whether and to what extent does moving to mass housing affect children’s
satisfaction with the residential environment?
Data is drawn from an on-going research project in Ankara, Turkey, called “Living in the Turkish Housing
Development Administration’s (TOKI) mass housing.” TOKI is a governmental institution tasked with the mission
of alleviating the country’s housing shortage. It also acts as the primary institution in the country responsible
from the implementation of urban regeneration projects. In Turkey, as in some other parts of the world, urban
regeneration has been dominated by property-led redevelopment (see, for example, Butler and Hamnett, 2009;
He and Wu, 2005). In squatter housing regeneration projects of TOKI, this entails the demolition of squatter
houses and replacing them with high-rise apartments, which are usually constructed on the same site and at a
higher density (Karaman, 2013). These housing units are then made available to displaced residents for purchase
via mortgage loans and to the public at market prizes.
In TOKI projects a cookie-cutter design is implemented. All buildings look alike and are designed only for
residential purposes. High-rise apartments are arranged in superblocks. While some apartments are clustered
around a small playground equipped with a decent amount of playing equipment, others are grouped around
large parking lots. Most TOKI projects lack recreational and sport facilities. Oftentimes, especially in crime-prone
neighborhoods, to protect their community from hostile outsiders, residents build large gated walls around their
apartments. In Ankara case, while some of these mass housing developments are located inside the heart of the
city, some others are located in the urban periphery. In this study, the authors focus on a TOKI project located
near the historical city center of Ankara.
Forty-one children, ranging in age from 9 to 12 years old and living in a mass housing development that was built
in the context of a squatter housing regeneration project participated in a survey, focus group, photo-voice and
mapping activity. While some of the child participants moved to TOKI units from the destroyed squatter
settlements, some others moved from neighborhood with higher socioeconomic status. In surveys, the authors
investigated children’s satisfaction from their past and current houses, as well as from their past and current
neighborhoods. In the paper, the authors will present the results obtained from the surveys, focus groups and
mapping activities.
This project is supported by a grant from the Scientific and Technological Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) [114C056]
References
 Butler, T. and Hamnett, C. (2009) Regenerating a global city. In R. Imrie, L. Lees and M. Raco (Eds)
Regenerating London. Routledge: Oxon.
 He, S. and Wu, F. (2005) Property-led redevelopment in post-reform China: A case study of Xintiandi
redevelopment project in Shanghai. Journal of Urban Affairs 27(1): 1-23.
 Karaman, O. (2013) Urban renewal in Istanbul: reconfigured spaces, robotic lives. International Journal
of Urban and Regional Research 37(2): 715-33.
 Severcan, Y.C. (2012) Children’s attachment to public space in the context of urban regeneration: Effects
of children’s involvement in planning and design activities. Unpublished doctoral thesis, College of
Architecture and Planning, University of Colorado Denver.

Abstract Index #: 862
EPHEMERAL EVENTS, PERMANENT PLACES? CONSTITUTING KAKA’AKO
Abstract System ID#: 293
Individual Paper
KOH, Annette [University of Hawaii at Manoa] koha@hawaii.edu
Place-making, especially its temporary urbanism variant, functions both as expressions of collective needs and as
pedagogical demonstrations of urban behaviors and aesthetics. The burgeoning popularity of short-term spatial
interventions or temporary place-making, signal a shift within urban_planning practice and discourse towards

flexibility, conviviality and creativity. At its most enticing, temporary place-making offers an “action research”
method that avoids the dull musty meetings of bureaucratic planning. Unsurprisingly for a relatively new set of
practices, most public discussion has been dominated by proponents offering descriptive compilations of
successes that tout the benefits to community building and economic development. While often framed as a
collective exercise of the right to the city, temporary place-making is not necessarily a radical departure from the
status quo and does not escape neoliberal redevelopment discourse. The current vogue for place-making
emphasizes the importance of social space without sufficiently grappling with the conflicts and contradictions
within social processes. By skipping these conflicts, many temporary urbanism projects are reinforcing definitions
of appropriate users and uses of urban space that exacerbate existing inequities.
This research seeks to extend the conversation by critically examining the adoption of temporary urbanism in the
context of one neighborhood in one city that is shaped by global processes of colonialism, capitalism, and
globalization. On an island framed by tourist reflections of Waikiki and the anti-urban struggles to sustain landbased Native Hawaiian genealogies, what does “being local” look like amidst the concrete and car exhaust of
Honolulu? This case study of Kaka’ako, a mostly light-industrial neighborhood undergoing massive high-profile
redevelopment, examines the proliferation of ephemeral creative place-making projects within the neighborhood
to understand 1) how these practices are situated within globally circulating discourses of the urban and the
specific histories and practices of the neighborhood; 2) what work are ideas of neighborhood, localness and
community enlisted to do; and 3) how do artists and creative industries entrepreneurs become emplaced as
“vicarious residents” and constituted as a community of stake-holders. Using ethnographic research techniques
such as participant-observation, semi-structured interviews, as well as social media analysis, this case study
focuses on the artists and entrepreneurs engaged in short-term spatial projects in Kaka‘ako and three projects in
particular that each exhibit a different temporal rhythm: an annual mural festival, a monthly night market, and a
warehouse/event space that is open daily.
Although these projects enjoy the financial support or outright sponsorship of the major landowners, the
organizers involved are seeking more imaginative outcomes than real estate development. Temporary placemaking projects are an opportunity for Honolulu residents to engage in urban image-making and place identity
formation that is not targeted for the tourist gaze. Through changing configurations of bodies, sounds, stories,
and uses, the spaces created by ephemeral place-making practices enact contradictory definitions of belonging
and place-identity that range from the exclusionary to the expansive.
I ultimately argue that the focus on temporariness can lend itself to erasure of place by presuming the value of
change and by privileging aesthetics and entertainment over mundane daily needs. The people who most
extensively and intensively inhabit the neighborhood spaces are delegitimized -- their need for shelter and access
to electricity is permanent rather temporary. In contrast, the artists and entrepreneurs - who do not live in
Kaka’ako - are empowered in their claims to neighborhood identity via their creation of temporary spaces. This
form of flexible urbanism permits these actors to materialize globally circulating ideas of urban cool that obscure
earlier understandings of the urban and the local that have been in operation.

Abstract Index #: 863
THE FLâNEUR, URBANITY AND VISUAL QUALITIES IN URBAN DESIGN: A STUDY OF LISBON, PORTUGAL
Abstract System ID#: 304
Poster
DEL RIO, Vicente [California State Polytechnic University, San Luis Obispo] vdelrion@calpoly.edu
Over the past decade, my frequent travels as visiting faculty to Lisbon, Portugal led me to develop an intense
fascination with the city. I never get tired from admiring its history and geographic setting, its people and intense
social life, its culture, and its urban design and architecture. I particularly love Lisbon’s historic core where all of
these qualities result in a lively and engaging environment where you can walk tirelessly for hours. This poster
explores my experience as a flaneur in Lisbon’s historic core, attracted by its urbanity and the visual qualities of
its urban design.

Although it is impossible to fully define urbanity, it is perhaps planning’s most noble goal. Urbanity is about
vitality, diversity, the human and existential dimensions of a city and its spaces (Gehl, 2010; Jacobs, 1961;
Norberg-Schulz, 1979), and about the presence of differences and the experience of otherness in a city
(Baudelaire apud Sennet, 1990: 123). As one experiences the city in movement, a fundamental key to urbanity is
walking, specifically walking without a purpose as a flâneur. The flâneur is a literary figure created by Baudelaire
(19th Century) to mean a man who takes pleasure in strolling and exploring city streets, observing life and its
characters. The flâneurie is above all a visual experience, described by Honoré de Balzac as “gastronomy of the
eye”. Walter Benjamin adopted the flâneur as the emblematic explorer of modern urban experience, and used
the concept as an analytical tool –the observer-participant. For his flâneur the city is composed by dialectic poles
as it opens up as landscape (enacting curiosity and exploration) and closes up as a room around him (enacting
comfort and safety). Considering that beyond need one walks through an urban area first and foremost when
he/she is attracted to the existing, emerging, and distant scenes along the route (Cullen, 1962), the flâneurie is
about visual engagement through urban design qualities.
In my very personal analysis and inspired by Lynch (1981) I firstly identified the three most important and
attractive meta-qualities in Lisbon make me want to go there in the first place: imageability, legibility, and the
human dimension. As discussed further in the poster, these are place-specific and unequivocally result from the
interplay between geography, history, culture, urban form, architecture, and people. They also set the stage for
and allow the multiplicity of combinations and elements shaping the next level of my analysis. In the second level
of my analysis I adopted the concept of flâneur as an analytical tool of the streets of historic Lisbon to consider
the impact of the most popular visual qualities in the planning and urban design literature. These qualities are:
legibility, coherence, surprise, complexity, robustness, transparency, vistas, enclosure, focal points, and
personalization. Although culturally and individually biased, these qualities are largely accepted in our profession
and have been adopted if not literary as goals then as inspiration for numerous plans and projects. The poster
will present short illustrated discussions about these qualities and their embodiments in Lisbon’s historic core,
demonstrating how they engage the flâneur and make his daily experiences revealing, unique and constantly
changing, enhancing Lisbon’s urbanity and his/her thirst to continue to explore it.
References
 Cullen, Gordon. 1961. Townscape. London: Architectural Press
 Gehl, Jan. 2010. People Places. Washington DC: Island Press
 Jacobs, Jane. 1961. Death and Life of Great American city. Pelican Books.
 Lynch, Kevin. 1981. Good City Form. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
 Sennet, Richard. 1990. The Conscience of the Eye. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.

Abstract Index #: 864
REGULATING WAYFINDING: FLEXIBLE APPROACHES TO CREATING NAVIGABLE PLACES
Abstract System ID#: 319
Pre-organized Session: Signs as Symbols of Cultural Landscape
JOURDAN, Dawn [University of Oklahoma] dawnjourdan@ou.edu
The American landscape has been transformed by on and off premise signs, particularly those which contain
commercial messages. Planners have had a love-hate relationship with signs, often describing their impact on
the urban landscape as visual blight. Given this perspective of signs, planners have attempted to place stringent
regulations on signs. These regulations often pit the business community and the city as adversaries, failing to
understand the importance of way finding on the vitality of the local vitality.
This paper seeks to explore the evolution of the ways in which regulators have gone about attempting to regulate
signs. It analyzes the impact of these regulations on place identity and cultural preservation, and proposes a
regulatory framework that allows the necessary flexibility necessary to allow signs to become a part of the urban
landscape.

Abstract Index #: 865
THE EFFECTS OF PERCEIVED ATTRIBUTES OF PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT ON WILLINGNESS TO WALK
Abstract System ID#: 321
Individual Paper
LIEN, Hao-Ting [The Ohio State University] htlien0404@gmail.com
The world is suffering from an obesity epidemic, but public health research suggests that regular physical activity
can prevent obesity and a series of chronic diseases (Warburton, Nicol, & Bredin, 2006). Walking, as the easiest
type of physical activity for most people, could improve health if performed on regular basis (Haskell et al., 2007).
Although personal factors affect walking, study showes that walking relates to the character of the actual and
perceived physical environment (Hoehner, Brennan-Ramirez, Elliott, Handy, & Brownson, 2005).
We need evidence, through systematic study, on what makes a place walkable. For that, one must consider how
to measure the environment. A systematic review of physical inventory reported as many as 20 major categories
and 291 items (Nickelson, Wang, Mitchell, Hendricks, & Paschal, 2013). This leaves an important question: which
of them capture attributes that affect people’s willingness to walk and how?
Much research on effects of physical environment on walking has relied on physical measures, such as  land_use,
traffic levels, block size, connectivity, and amount of sidewalk infrastructure. Studies show major effects of
aesthetics on walkability, but for policy those findings leave open the question of what properties of an
environment make it aesthetically pleasing and desirable for walking. The present study sought to fill the gap.
Research on environment preferences (aesthetics) has identified salient perceived attributes of the
environment such as enclosure, order, complexity, naturalness, upkeep and found them related to aesthetic
response (Nasar, 1998). To guide plans for walkable environments in terms of aesthetics, we need to know: 1) the
cases in which the physical and perceived measures of the attributes overlap and 2) whether the aesthetic
response to them translates into the willingness to walk.
Much of the research on walkability is correlational. Taking place in real world settings, it leaves many variables
uncontrolled and cannot establish cause. To overcome these problems, the present research project first selected
a pool of perceived attributes, salient in environment perception, that also relate to aesthetic response and
that might affect the willingness to walk. Then, the researcher conducted a survey to test the main effect of each
attribute on willingness to walk. That study had participants view and respond to computer-generated color
images showing different levels of each attribute. Some participants rated the images for the physically
manipulated attribute and other rated the images for walkability. For the physical attributes that related to the
perceived attributes and had the largest effect size on walkability, the researcher conducted a second study to
test their main and interactive effects on the willingness to walk. The findings indicated that as expected
walkability related to certain perceived “aesthetically pleasing” attributes and that in some cases there were
interaction effects accentuating the positive effect.
The results provide insights into what physical and perceived attributes overlap, affect people’s willingness to
walk and it reveals their relative importance. Future research could test the effects of manipulations of those
attributes in real environments in different places and for different populations to see how well the lab findings
generalize to real world conditions.
References
 Haskell, W. L., Lee, I. M., Pate, R. R., Powell, K. E., Blair, S. N., Franklin, B. A., Bauman, A. (2007). Physical
activity and public health: updated recommendation for adults from the American College of Sports
Medicine and the American Heart Association. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 39(8), 1423-1434.








Hoehner, C. M., Brennan-Ramirez, L. K., Elliott, M. B., Handy, S. L., & Brownson, R. C. (2005). Perceived
and objective environment measures and physical activity among urban adults. Am J Prev Med, 28(2
Suppl 2), 105-116.
Nasar, J. L. (1998). The Evaluative Image of the City. Thousand Oaks, California: SAGE Publication, Inc.
Nickelson, J., Wang, A. R., Mitchell, Q. P., Hendricks, K., & Paschal, A. (2013). Inventory of the physical
environment domains and subdomains measured by neighborhood audit tools: A systematic literature
review. Journal of environment Psychology, 36, 179-189.
Warburton, D. E., Nicol, C. W., & Bredin, S. S. (2006). Health benefits of physical activity: the evidence.
CMAJ, 174(6), 801-809.

Abstract Index #: 866
UTILIZING IMAGE ANALYSIS SOFTWARE TO ASSESS SIGNAGE CONSPICUITY IN COMPLEX SIGNAGE
ENVIRONMENTS
Abstract System ID#: 328
Pre-organized Session: Signs as Symbols of Cultural Landscape
AUFFREY, Christopher [University of Cincinnati] chris.auffrey@uc.edu
Outdoor signage is a critical element of communication in urban environments, providing for situational
awareness or indexing of places within the physical environment; wayfinding or directional information; basic
communication regarding activities on a site, products or services available on a site, or other types of
information regarding observer interest in a site; and contributing to broader efforts at branding specific
products or services (Bertucci & Crawford, 2011) The American Planning Association has encouraged planners
“to think outside of the regulatory framework where signs are concerned and to approach signs as a positive
design and communication element in their comminuty (Morris 2000, 2). Similarly, the APA has encouraged sign
companies to work with planners as they seek to improve the built environment (Morris 2000, 3). So, while the
importance of “well-designed” signage is widely recognized, there are few tools that either sign designers or
planners use to objectively assist the sign design or regulation processes. This is especially important for complex
urban environments where rarely does “one size fits all.” Signs designed or regulated for more general contexts
may fail to capture the attention of the intended audience and therefore fail in its communication objective. The
purpose of this presentation is to report on the use of web-based digital image analysis software and to explore
its potential for planning education and research as a tool to assist both sign designers and city planners as they
jointly seek to enhance the communication effective of signs while respecting local aesthetic sensibilities.
Faculty researchers and graduate students sought to build on the concepts of environment signage
communication introduced in Venturi and other’s (1977) to assess how varying urban environment contexts
affected the effectiveness of on-premise outdoor signs to capture the attention of an intended audience. To this
end, 3M’s Visual Attention Software (VAS) was used to assess how design and environment context combine to
influence the “attention getting power” of representative on-premise commercial signage located in several of
Cincinnati’s neighborhood business districts. VAS uses a predictive algorithm, based on eye-tracking studies, to
test for the “pre-attentive vision” important for directing attention in the first 3-5 seconds of viewing (3M VAS
2015).
The signage evaluated ranged from traditional pole, wall, blade and window signs with varied lighting sources,
including standard neon or back-lit image graphics, to contemporary electric message centers. Researcher
sought to take into account the complexities of the environment contexts, including the size, color and design
of the signage, and the building milieu such as architectural style, building heights and conditions and setbacks,
as well as franchise branding typologies. In addition, environment features such as street trees and bushes,
utility poles and wires, parked cars, trash cans, and public and private signage, all became part of the relevant
environmental context. Photographs were taken from multiple perspectives and distances to capture the
multiple perspectives from which a prospective customer of the businesses might be expected to view the
signage. After the initial VAS analysis, Adobe Photoshop was used to attempt to increase each sign’s pre-

attentive vision while maintaining compliance with existing sign codes, and maintaining or enhancing a sign’s
graphic quality (based on qualitative assessment).
Preliminary findings indicate that the image analysis software serves as a useful tool for assisting both designers
and planners. Designers can better understand the multiple contextual influences on the effectiveness of
exterior on-premise signs and how to adjust standard designs to compensate for those contextual influences
while still conforming to sign regulations. Planners can use the software to better understand how citywide sign
regulations that work well in some contexts may limit sign effectiveness in others.
References
 3M Visual Attention Software. 2015. The Science Behind VAS. Accessed February 22, 2015 at:
http://solutions.3m.com/wps/portal/3M/en_US/VAS_NA/Home/How2/
 Bertucci AD, Crawford RB. 2011. Model On-Premise Sign Code. Bristol, PA: United States Sign Council.
Accessed January 7, 2014 at: http://www.usscfoundation.org/USSCModelOn-PremiseSignCode.pdf
 Venturi R, Brown DS, Izenour S. 1977. Learning From Las Vegas. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
 Morris M, Hinshaw HL, Mace D, Weinstein A. 2000. Context-Sensitive Signage Design. Chicago:
American Planning Association, Planning Advisory Service
 US Small Business Administration and the Signage Foundation for Communication Excellence. 2003.
The Signage Sourcebook: A Signage Handbook. Sherwood, OR: Signage Foundation

Index #: 867
THE IMPACT OF TRANSIT-ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT ON SOCIAL CAPITAL
Abstract System ID#: 334
Individual Paper
NOLAND, Robert [Rutgers University] rnoland@rutgers.edu, presenting author, primary author
PUNIELLO, Orin [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] otp@ejb.rutgers.edu
TULACH, Nicholas [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] nkt@rutgers.edu
DIPETRILLO, Stephanie [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] sed@ejb.rutgers.edu
This paper focuses on the ability of Transit Oriented Development (TOD) to improve social bonds and interactions
within a community. The expectation is that TOD has a positive impact on the lifestyle and activities of
individuals, who reside, work, and frequent these locations. One potential way that a community may be
affected is in how residents are engaged with their community; this is one element of what is commonly referred
to as social capital. The definition of social capital has emerged as a concept that encompasses “social networks
and the norms of reciprocity and trust to which to which those networks give rise.”(Putnam 2001, Putnam &
Sander 2010).
The key question this paper explores is whether TOD has a positive effect on community social capital. To
address this question, this paper studies the effect of TOD on social capital by analyzing a 2012 survey of
households in eight comminuty in New Jersey that are well-served by transit. The household survey focused on
a large number of topics designed to assess or measure the benefits of TOD that have accrued to individuals and
the comminuty in which they reside. Comprehensive in nature, the survey sought information on active and
public transportation behaviors, commute and non-commute travel patterns, use of local amenities, personal
health, and social interaction, in addition to collecting demographic data on the household.
The focus of this paper is an analysis of self-reported social capital variables. Our survey design allowed
collection of data from households both near the transit station and up to about two miles distance from the
station. We use Logit and Probit regression models to analysis the effect of TOD on previously validated social
capital questions. We further test the relationship between social capital and TOD by creating a social capital
index using questions from the survey. These questions inquire about respondents perceptions of neighborhood
as a place to live, sense of community, knowing their neighbors, and trust. This index acts as a proxy for the
“trust”, “safety”, “collective norms and values”, and “belonging” domains of social capital (Forrest and Kearns

2001). Using this social capital index, we find statistical significant evidence of improved social capital for people
living in TODs.
From a planning perspective, this paper’s finding of a positive relationship between TOD and social capital, adds
to the growing literature on the benefits of TOD. Sander and Putnam (2010) put the need for social capital in the
stark term that, “no democracy, and indeed no society, can be healthy without at least a modicum of this
resource (social capital).” More concretely, social capital has been found to improve the health and happiness of
citizens, reduce crime, improve governance, and improve economies (Sander & Putnam 2010).
References
 Brueckner, J., & Largey, A. (2007). Social Interaction and Urban Sprawl. Journal of Urban Economics,
64(2008), 18-34.
 Freeman, L. (2001). The effects of sprawl on neighborhood social ties: An explanatory analysis. Journal of
the American Planning Association, 67(1), 69-77.
 Putnam, R. (2001). Social Capital: Measurement and Consequences. Canadian Journal of Policy Research,
2, 41-51.
 Sander, T. (2002). Social Capital and New Urbanism: Leading a Civic Horse to Water. National Civic
Review, 91(3), 213-234.
 Sander T., & Putnam, R. (2010). Still Bowling Alone? The Post 9/11 Split. Journal of Democracy, 21(1), 916

Abstract Index #: 868
COMPREHENSIVE ASSESSMENT ON NEIGHBORHOOD DESIGN AND HOUSING PRICE: A META-ANALYSIS
FOCUSING ON THE DEFINITION OF A NEIGHBORHOOD
Abstract System ID#: 411
Individual Paper
PARK, Yunmi [Texas A & M University] urbanmi@gmail.com, presenting author, primary author
HUANG, Shih Kai [Texas A & M University] skysnow0080@gmail.com
Previous scholarly research has examined the  impact of neighborhood design elements on market prices for
properties—a proxy of neighborhood satisfaction—while findings were inconsistent with each other. For
instance, several researchers uncover that high density is likely to decrease the housing price (Geoghegan,
Wainger, and Bockstael 1997; Song and Knaap 2003), but Tu and Eppli (1999) find that high density is a favorable
condition in a neighborhood where new urbanism principles such as high density, mixed use, and better street
connectivity were implemented. Similarly, mixed  land_uses are also good (Geoghegan, Wainger, and Bockstael
1997) or bad conditions on property value (Jones, Leishman, and MacDonald 2009; Geoghegan, Wainger, and
Bockstael 1997). Two studies done by Song and Knapp find that mixed  land_use may or may not be a positive
condition in increasing property value. They find that people are less willing to pay premiums for mixed  land_use
(Song and Knapp 2003), but their follow-up work uncovers that certain types of  land_use is positively associated
with neighborhood satisfaction, especially residential, commercial and public spaces Song and Knapp 2004).
Another possible influence on housing premium turns out to be street connectivity. Similar to other design
elements, having a better street connectivity could be positive (Song and Knaap 2004) or a negative  impact on
housing price (Asabere 1990; Matthews and Turnbull 2007).
Results from these case-studies cannot pinpoint the  impact of neighborhood design on housing price. This is
partially because of different study area that have dissimilar planning policy, geography, or cultural and
historical background. Data sources, measurement, or unit of analysis can be another reason. This study,
however, highlights different operational definitions of “neighborhoods” adopted in previous studies.
Researchers often use the same term neighborhood to refer to census geography, a buffer distance from an
individual parcel, or other geographic units. Meanwhile, residents may respond differently to the different scales
of neighborhood conditions. In order to account for this issue, our study seeks to generalize the  impact of
neighborhood design elements defined by density, mixed  land_use, street pattern, and open space on housing

prices, using meta-analysis. In particular, neighborhood that have been grouped according to their definitions
will be also compared to each other. Forty-two previous published and unpublished works for 25-year period
from 1990 to 2015 are used for the analyses.
References
 Geoghegan, Jacqueline, Lisa A. Wainger, and Nancy E. Bockstael. 1997. "Spatial landscape indices in a
hedonic framework: An ecological economics analysis using GIS." Ecological Economics no. 23 (3):251264.
 Matthews, John W., and Geoffrey K. Turnbull. 2007. "Neighborhood street layout and property value:
The interaction of accessibility and  land_use mix." The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics no.
35 (2):111-141.
 Song, Yan, and Gerrit-Jan Knaap. 2003. "New urbanism and housing values: A disaggregate assessment."
Journal of Urban Economics no. 54 (2):218-238.
 Song, Yan, and Gerrit-Jan Knaap. 2004. "Measuring urban form: Is Portland winning the war on sprawl?"
Journal of the American Planning Association no. 70 (2):210-225.
 Tu, Charles C., and Mark J. Eppli. 1999. "Valuing new urbanism: The case of Kentlands." Real Estate
Economics no. 27 (3):425-451.

Abstract Index #: 869
ENHANCING THE SOCIAL CAPITAL OF OPEN SPACE IN ABU DHABI
Abstract System ID#: 435
Poster
AL ALI, Anfal [Masdar Institute of Science and Technology] analali@masdar.ac.ae, presenting author
MAGHELAL, Praveen [Masdar Institute] pmaghelal@masdar.ac.ae
Urban designers and planners propose that open spaces between developments can greatly contribute to
enhance the quality of life in several ways (Chiensura, 2004). Several research studies have concluded that
improving the quality of open space can lead to social, psychological, and environment benefits (Coley et al.,
1997; Sanchez, 2010). Therefore, well-planned open space can encourage the use of outdoor space, as a result
advance social integration and interaction within the neighborhood. In addition, other socio-psychological studies
have reported that the quality of open spaces can affect human psychology; it can reduce stress and aggression,
and increase citizens’ performance and efficiency (Groenewegen, et al., 2006). Reintroducing nature to current
urban setting adds aesthetic value to the space, as a result, generating attractive spaces that reflects the natural
and historical aspects of the city which in turn enriches the economy and tourism benefiting both citizens and
governments. However, the urban developments in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) keep open spaces free of any
amenities when they can be re-planned in a way that advances the quality of the built environment.
This study analyzed open spaces in selected land-uses in Abu Dhabi. It targeted two types of  land_uses, lowdensity residential, and high-density mixed use neighborhood. These kinds of developments are atypical in the
mainland of the city of Abu Dhabi. Although open spaces have a potential to improve the social capital of the
community, at present, they are under-utilized. Therefore, developing under-utilized spaces in these area can
resolve wide range of health-related problems. For instance, the US-UAE Business Council study (2014) indicates
that 90 percent of deaths in the UAE are caused by sedentary, chronic lifestyle leading to non-communicable
diseases like diabetes, cardio-vascular conditions, hypertension, and cancer. The improvement can result in
enhanced social capital, engagement, interaction, connectivity, and walkability, in addition to providing several
required and desired amenities for both residents and visitors to the area. In this study, several characteristics of
open spaces were analyzed including sidewalks, setbacks between buildings, trees, recreational and retail
activities, art and sculptures, and shaded versus uncovered area while controlling for  land_uses within the urban
setting. The objective of this study was to understand people’s behavior in open spaces in and around their
habitation, and inquire their preferences to provide design solution to improve the social capital of the open
place.

This study was conducted in three phases. In the first phase, a photo analysis of present people’s behavioral
activities and preferences in their context area was explored during different timings of the day including
weekdays and weekends. In the second phase, surveys were distributed to the volunteers present at the context
area in order to understand their immediate experience of the urban open space. The survey also inquired about
their expectations and suggestions to improve the quality of the space. The response to their perception and
expectations were combined with theories of open space design to provide a pragmatic urban design solutions
that fits well within the cultural, social, and economic aspect of Abu Dhabi.
References
 Chiesura, A., 2004. The role of urban parks for sustainable city. Landscape and urban_planning. 68, 129138
 Coley, R., Kuo, F., Sullivan, W., 1997. Where does community grow? The social context created by nature
in urban public housing. environment Behavior. 29, 468–494.
 Groenewegen, P.P., Van den Berg, A.E., Sjerp de Vries and Verheij, R.A., 2006. Vitamin G: effects of
green space on health, well-being, and social safety. BMC Public Health. 6, 149-157.
 Sanchez, J.J., 2010. An assessment and analysis of issues and patterns associated with the utilization of
open spaces by latino immigrants in an urban neighborhood in Boston. Thesis submitted to Tufts
University.
 The U.A.E Health Sector., 2014. Report by U.S-U.A.E Business Council. Washington D.C.

Abstract Index #: 870
A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF CROSS-CULTURAL PERCEPTIONS AND PREFERENCES FOR RESIDENTIAL DENSITY
PATTERNS AND SUSTAINABLE LIFESTYLE BETWEEN PEOPLE LIVING IN THE U.S AND CHINA
Abstract System ID#: 503
Individual Paper
ZHANG, Xin [The Ohio State University] zhang.1977@buckeyemail.osu.edu, presenting author, primary author
NASAR, Jack [The Ohio State University] nasar.1@osu.edu
The concepts of density described or measured through several qualitative and quantitative methods usually are
not identical. According to its definitions, crowding, physical density, social density, perceived density and others
connect with different interpretations and applications. One way to distinguish these density types is based on
the objective or subjective facts. The planning-oriented measurements (for example, dwelling units per acre)
generally reflect the physical density, while the perceived density describes an individual’s perception of how
crowded a given area is (Rapoport, 1975). Density also associates with environment capacity, energy
consumption and sustainability. Previous studies have indicated that perceptions of perceived density for various
cultural groups are dissimilar (Rosenberg, 1968; Rapoport, 1977; Wohlwill, 1974; Wohlwill & Kohn, 1978; et al.).
As compared to Americans, Asian people are more inclined to living in dense area (Chan, 1999), but there is no
solid evidence about how different they are, whether the gap has been narrowed for recent years, and what are
the effects of sustainable lifestyle on their density choices.
This study sought to explore the features of preferred residential density between Americans and Chinese. It
aimed to understand different types of residential density that were most favored by the two groups from three
dimensions: housing, neighborhood or community, and relative location to city center (the densest urban area).
There were 122 randomly contacted respondents from three Chinese national universities and 203 from the U.S.
completing an online survey through instant messaging tools and ResearchMatch.org[1], including 218 females
and 107 males, and their age range was from 19 to 40 with the average 28.5. (One of the recruitment criteria was
living in their own countries for the lifetime.) Therefore, the study mainly provided the results of young
generations without mixed cultural experience for the both countries.
Several statistical tests examined the preferences of the residential patterns, and linear regressions analyzed
their relationships with living experience, family size, attitudes to the “low-carbon” lifestyle, and other
demographic characteristics. The results showed that the two cultural groups overall shared very similar

preferences of density patterns that differing from the previous findings except for a few housing types, and the
majority preferred relatively low density with gender differences instead of group differences. For both groups, if
people claimed that they supported the “low-carbon lifestyle”, they also tended to prefer the high residential
density. Chinese people lived in large city generally preferred low-density residential patterns, but American
people in rural area preferred high-density residential patterns. In addition, American people have a relatively
accurate sense of density as their self-reported preferred living densities were consistent with their rating scores
for real patterns, but Chinese group did not.
Considering the preferred residential density through the capacity of buildings, number of neighbors, distance to
the neighbors and public spaces, and energy conscious for different cultural groups could provide useful
information for housing policy and design strategies. First, it helps to understand the heterogeneity of values or
preferences for the two groups as well as their homogeneity. Second, as we have found that current experience
affects people’s preference more than their previous experience for Americans, experiencing the new
development projects with medium or high density could influence their attitudes to suburban life. Last, attitudes
to sustainable life is not only reflected on people’s travel modes, but also on their favors of density.
[1] A national electronic, web-based recruitment tool funded in part by the NIH Clinical and Translational Science
Award program. For details, see https://www.researchmatch.org
References
 Rapoport, A. (1975) Toward a redefinition of density. Environment and Behavior (7), 133-158.
 Rapoport, A. (1977). Human aspects of urban form: towards a man-environment approach to urban
form and design. New York: Pergamon Press.
 Rosenberg, G. (1968) High population densitites in relation to social behavior. Ekistics, 25, 425-428.
 Wohlwill, J. F. (1974) Human adaptation to levels of environment stimulation. Human Ecology, 2(2),
127-147.
 Wohlwill, J. F. and Kohn, I. (1978) The environment as experienced by the migrant: An adaptation-level
view. Representative Research in Social Psychology 4, 135-164.

Abstract Index #: 871
SAFETY OF CHILDREN WALKING TO SCHOOL IN INNER CITY neighborhood: IMPLICATIONS FOR POLICY AND
WALKABILITY AUDIT TOOLS
Abstract System ID#: 530
Individual Paper
BAHL, Deepak [University of Southern California] bahl@usc.edu, presenting author, primary author
BANERJEE, Tridib [University of Southern California] tbanerje@usc.edu
This paper will report the findings of a study currently underway examining the inner city children’s experience of
walking to school. Under a grant from the Sol Price Center for Social Innovation, the study is conducted in City
Heights, a low-income, multi-ethnic and working class neighborhood of San Diego. The objective of this study is
to examine the major factors affecting the safety of children in their daily journeys between home and school. In
this study, children are not only the subjects, but also active participants. Using a conceptual model of a child’s
school travel, the project investigates the relative role of the built environment and social milieu in affecting
children’s walking experience. The study involves about 150 fifth-graders from five elementary schools. It
documents children’s walking experience and their perception of risks and hazards, supplemented by parent
perceptions. The methodology includes both quantitative and qualitative tools using parent surveys, naturalistic
field research, focus group interviews, and children-centered methods such as photo journal, cognitive mapping,
travel diary, and focus group discussions. The findings of this research are expected to better inform current
programs, identify area that are perceived unsafe by children, and recommend interventions and social
innovations in improving the safety of child pedestrians in general, and of children walking to school in particular.
The paper will conclude with a broader discussion of the concept of “environmental press” as it pertains to the
child user, and possible lacunae in the available walkability audit tools promoted by the public health community.

References
 Loukaitou-Sideris, A. (2006). Is It Safe to Walk? Neighborhood Safety and Security Considerations and
Their Effects on Walking. Journal of Planning Literature 20(3), 219-232.
 McMillan, T. E. (2005). Urban Form and a Child’s Trip to School: The Current Literature and a Framework
for Future Research. Journal of Planning Literature 19(4), 440-456.
 Transportation Research Board. (2005). Special Report 282: Does the Built Environment Influence
Physical Activity? Examining the Evidence. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
 Transportation Research Board. (2002). Special Report 269: The Relative Risks of School Travel: A
Nationwide Perspective and Guidance for Local Community Risk Assessment. Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press.
 Banerjee, T., Uhm, J., & Bahl, D., Walking to School: The Experience of Children in Inner City Los Angeles
and Implications for Policy. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 34(2):123-140.

Abstract Index #: 872
THE POLICY DRIVERS OF URBAN MICROCLIMATE: A CRITICAL EVALUATION OF ZONING AND DESIGN
GUIDELINES
Abstract System ID#: 554
Individual Paper
HERIS, Mehdi [University of Colorado, Denver] mehdi.heris@colorado.edu
This research aims to explore how urban policy in particular zoning and design guidelines can mitigate or
exacerbate heat in city. My main research questions are: (1) how have different downtown development
policies influenced their microclimates? And (2) to what extent are policy and codes (zoning and design
guidelines) capable of mitigating urban heat through shaping the form elements in two different downtown
neighborhood in the Denver metro area?
Studies show that urban area are about one to four degrees Celsius warmer than their surroundings (this varies
during days and nights) (EPA, 2008). Considering that the IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change)
(2013) projects that the global temperature will increase four to six degrees Celsius due to anthropogenic global
warming by the end of this century, it is very likely that city will experience more frequent and intense heat
waves in the future. The literate shows that the effects of an urban heat on public health, environment justice,
energy and water consumption, and even social life of public spaces are significant (Harlan et al, 2008). Akbari et
al (2005) found that electricity demand in city increases by two to four percent (2-4%) for each 1˚C increase in
the temperature. In addition, over the last couple of decades, considerable mortalities are attributed to heat
waves. For example, Stone (2012) argued that 70,000 deaths were attributed to the 2003 heat wave in Europe.
This raises the question whether current policy can address the urban heat issue properly at local level. There is
a gap in planning and design theories and methods in addressing the role of urban codes and standards for heat
mitigation. The majority of proposed heat mitigation strategies are focused on albedo and vegetation increase
while the role of urban form and morphology are considerably neglected. My research has addressed this gap
through exploring the policy implications of the ways urban form influences the micro climate of high density
urban area.
In order to answer the questions, I chose two downtown area in the Denver metro area: downtown Denver and
downtown Lakewood (Belmare). Two different development approaches in downtown Denver are applied. In the
northern part of it (Lower Downtown or LoDo) a historical preservation approach is adopted. The southern part
of downtown is heavily developed by high rise buildings. Belmare is a recently renewed downtown area based
on form-based codes (FBC) approach. Belmare offers a mixed use pattern with diverse housing and retail
activities.

This research used a wide range of data including GIS datasets and surface temperature captured from satellite
images. In order to map high temporal and spatial temperature data, I distributed 20 ambient temperature data
loggers in these neighborhood. I used a three-phased methodology. In the first phase, I analyzed, categorized,
and coded the contents of policy and standards (zoning and design guidelines) in these area to highlight
standards that control the built environment features which can potentially influence urban microclimate. In the
second phase, I compared these policy with the recently renewed or developed buildings to underline and track
the effects of policy and codes on the form elements. In the third phase, I used the identified form elements
including building envelope, building height-street width ratio, landscaping standards, and building roof and
façade standards to simulate their roles in urban microclimate. Through the simulation and modeling of urban
microclimate processes, I evaluated the role of policy and codes in driving microclimate variations.
The results show that policy made a significant difference in microclimate variations. FBCs in Belmar, has
effectively created a lower and more comfortable temperature in the neighborhood and specifically in the public
spaces. Historical downtown preservation policy also mitigated the temperature in some area. However, the
lack of landscaping standards were significant. In the southern part of downtown Denver, higher temperature
were detected due to the built environment elements.
References
 Akbari, H. (2005). Energy Saving Potentials and Air Quality Benefits of Urban Heat Island Mitigation.
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.
 EPA. (2008). Reducing Urban Heat Islands: Compendium of Strategies Describes.
 Harlan, S., Brazel, A. & Jenerette, G. (2008). In the Shade of Affluence: The Inequitable Distribution of the
Urban Heat Island.
 IPCC, 2013: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K.
Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 1535 pp.
 Stone, B. (2012). The City and the Coming Climate: Climate Change in the Places We Live. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Abstract Index #: 873
A NEW BRAND OF SUBURBIA
Abstract System ID#: 585
Individual Paper
SAMPLES, Samantha [Arizona State University] samantha.samples@asu.edu, presenting author, primary author
CREWE, Katherine [Arizona State University] kcrewe@asu.edu
The last decade has witnessed a growing presence of food in both academia and popular culture. Urban
agriculture is widespread, as are CSAs (community supported agriculture), and a new awareness of food security
in the works of Michael Pollan and documentaries such as Food, Inc. and Forks Over Knives. Planners and urban
designers for their part are promoting walkability, New Urbanism, Green Urbanism and edible urban landscapes.
Many are reassessing the role of city, housing developments and urban lifestyles in ways that point towards
compactness and free access. Despite this, new suburban developments continue to repeat the patterns of
sprawl and tract housing. As a result, we are seeing food appropriated as part of a suburban agenda—while
incorporating select principles of New Urbanism and food security. Widely known as agricultural urbanism or
‘agrihoods,’ these new suburban developments are marketed as combining walkability, community, local food
and environment sustainability. Upon further analysis however, these developments coincide with a splurge of
suburban development in city noted for sprawl (i.e. Phoenix, Atlanta), appear oriented towards affluent
populations and do little to improve urban food security.
This study assesses six agrihoods across the US including Agritopia in Gilbert, Arizona (160 acres); South Village in
South Burlington, Vermont (220 acres); Serenbe in Chattahoochee Hills, Georgia (1,000 acres with 224 existing

homes and 800 planned); Willowsford in Loudon County Virginia (2,130 single family homes); Harvest in
Northlake, Texas (3,200 single family homes planned), and Rancho Mission Viejo in California (14,000 homes
planned over the next two decades). All advocate preserved open space, agriculture, high quality design and a
community-oriented lifestyle as foundations for their development.
We ask: are these developments the answer to ever growing food needs in today’s city, or do they hijack the
principles of food, urbanism and community in ways that will lead not to the claims they are marketing, but to
tomorrow’s suburbia? We look at lifestyles, housing prices and property sizes, mission statements and
demographics to assess the similarities and differences between existing agrihoods. Large-scale developments
such as Willowsford may have few similarities to small-scale developments such as Agritopia, but as the
involvement of developers increases, profit-driven decisions are likely to lead to more uniform projects. Finally,
we discuss agrihoods future potential as either a benefit or detriment to the food movement, residential
development and city. In order to enhance food security, agrihoods should be providing sufficient food for all
their residents to rely on, and not just supplement existing food offerings. Further, such developments should be
available for those who most need healthy and affordable food: lower income, minorities and those living in food
deserts. While agrihoods claim to fill this void, to date, nothing supports this assertion. This study fills this
knowledge gap.
References
 Donnally, T. (2015, January 12). Growing Sociability: Integrating Communal Spaces with Development.
Retrieved March 3, 2015, from Urban Land: http://urbanland.uli.org/development-business/growingsociability-integrating-communal-spaces-development/
 Gittelsohn, J. (2015, February 26). Bloomberg Business. Retrieved March 1, 2015, from It's a Beautiful
Day in the Agrihood: http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-02-26/to-lure-homebuyersdevelopers-use-farms-vegetable-gardens
 Murphy, K. (2014, March 11). Farm-to-Table Living Takes Root. Retrieved February 27, 2015, from The
New York Times: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/12/dining/farm-to-table-living-takesroot.html?_r=1
 Ranney, V., Kirley, K., & Sands, M. (2010). Building comminuty with Farms: Insights from developers,
architects and farmers on integrating agriculture and development. Grayslake: The Liberty Prairie
Foundation.

Abstract Index #: 874
LEGAL METHODS FOR PRESERVING COMMUNITY CULTURAL SIGN HERITAGE
Abstract System ID#: 609
Pre-organized Session: Signs as Symbols of Cultural Landscape
OAST, Robert [The Ohio State University] oast.1@osu.edu
Local sign ordinances are comprehensive. They regulate every aspect of signs, including: location, height, shape,
lighting, and maintenance. They prescribe different regulations for on-premise and off-premise signs. Some
ordinances ban certain types of signs, others provide for amortization or removal of non-conforming signs, and all
ordinances require permits to display signs.
Many urban neighborhood have a distinct socio-cultural identity that draws people and businesses to the city
in which they are located. City officials and boosters promote this aspect of their neighborhood, seeking to
appeal to visitors and prospective residents. In these culturally distinct neighborhood, signs are a means of
expression as well as an advertising medium, and are an important part of the cultural landscape of the
community in the same way that buildings or businesses are.
Many sign codes are uniform across their jurisdictions, and provide no means for reflecting the “hyper-local”
distinctions that are important to culturally distinct neighborhood. Moreover, many local codes only allow
modifications to signs if those modifications are in compliance with the code. And signs that do not conform to

the local sign code may be subject to amortized removal. As a result of rigid sign codes, amortized removal, and
modification into uniformity, the part of a community’s cultural fabric that is expressed by its distinct signage is
gradually eroding.
This paper will explore ways in which signs codes can be drafted or amended to address the need for flexibility
that is essential to maintaining socio-cultural identity. With an emphasis on legal and constitutional
considerations, the paper will review the array of available  land_use regulation techniques, and consider how
those techniques may be applied to relieve sign codes of some of their unfortunate collateral damage.
References
 Duerksen, Christopher, and Goebel, R. Matthew. 1999. Aesthetics, Community Character and theLaw.
Chicago: American Planning Association
 Mandelker, Daniel. 2004. Street Graphics and the Law. Chicago: American Plannning Association
 US Sign Council. 2011. A Model on-premise Sign Code. Bristol, PA: US Sign Council
 Jourdan, Dawn, et al. 2004. An Evidence Based Model Sign Code. College Station, TX: Urban Design
Associates

Abstract Index #: 875
DOES THE ENTROPY INDEX OF  land_use MIX (LUM) POSITIVELY EFFECT PEDESTRIAN VOLUME?
Abstract System ID#: 622
Individual Paper
CHOI, Chang Gyu [Hanyang University] cgchoi@hanyang.ac.kr
IM, Ha Na [Hanyang University] hanaim84@naver.com
Jacobs (1961) emphasized  land_use mix in urban districts to improve walking environments with safety and
vitality.  land_use mix could reduce the trip distance to increase the equity for low income people who do not
have enough money to trip and would be vulnerable to overweight and obese. The measurement and index of
 land_use mix should be critical for urban design, urban_planning, transportation planning, physical activity and
health, and etc.
Cervero (1989) initiated to use entropy score to describe  land_use mix of the suburban centers in United States
and Cervero & Kockelman (1997) developed the entropy score for  land_use mix (LUM) as the standard form.
Brown et al. (2009), however, pointed out the six limitation of the index by simulating different  land_use
configurations. Recent empirical studies (ex, Yun & Choi, 2013) even showed the negative relationship between
LUM and pedestrian volume.
This study would appropriate simulation to find the reasons of the limitation of LUM along with the possible
conditions when the score could work or not. By developing more diverse experimental conditions of  land_use
mix than Brown et al. (2009) did, the simulation would clearly show the restriction of LUM and find the specific
situations when LUM is a reasonable score to make clear the relationship between  land_use mix and pedestrian
volume. Residential, commercial, industrial, recreational and cultural  land_uses would generate different walking
trips and not be the same destinations for pedestrians. Such different districts as commercial and/or residential
in city could result in diverse relationship between LUM and walking volume. Even urban and suburban area as
well as countries would affect the connection. While we tune the configurations of the uses and alter the
pedestrian volume of unit area for the origination and destination trip of each  land_use, we would find the
circumstance whether LUM explain pedestrian volume well or not. With the possible findings of this study further
researches could use LUM in the proper setting to describe pedestrian volume and walking activity in different
areas and countries.
References
 Brown, B.B. et al. (2009). Mixed  land_use and walkability- Variations in  land_use measures and
relationships with BMI, overweight, and obesity. Health & Place 15, 1130-1141.






Cervero, R. (1989). America’s Suburban Centers: The  land_use-transportation link. Boston: Unwin
Hyman.
Cervero, R., & Kockelman, K. (1997). Travel demand and the 3Ds-density, diversity, and design.
Transportation Research D, 2(3), 199-219.
Jacobs, J. (1961, 1992). The Death and Life of Great American city, New York: Vintage Books
Yun, N. Y. & Choi, C.G. (2013). Relationship between pedestrian volume and pedestrian environment
factors on the commercial streets in Seoul. Journal of Korea Planners Association, 48(4), 1-16.

Abstract Index #: 876
SPATIAL JUSTICE AND URBAN WARFARE: EVERYDAY TACTICS OF RESILIENCE
Abstract System ID#: 634
Individual Paper
BLEIBLEH, Sahera [United Arab Emirates University] sbleibleh@gmail.com
Living with insecurity in the occupied Palestine continues to affect all aspects of everyday life. It hammers the
quality of the individuals’ lives as much as it affects their environments. In a war zone, the meaning and impact of
spatial justice and urban warfare is characterized not only in military strategies but also in creating a larger
context of social inequality that is deeply contradictory and ambivalent. Confronting renewal struggle everyday
nurtures people’s social bonds and strong connection to each other through bonds of kinship and friendship.
Also, they often take pride in homes and spaces they have built, inherited used over generations. The
uncertainties of daily experiences under the Israeli occupation consequences in tensions, but the inhabitants
nevertheless experience their homes as a place of social intimacy. Thus, the social world of the home is both a
place of danger and safety.
Drawing on ongoing ethnographic research from 2010 among Palestinians in the old town of Nablus and later in
Jenin Refugee Camp whose homes were destroyed during the 2002 Israeli invasion, Edjteyah, this paper explicitly
examines the impact of urban violence upon the physical and social meaning of home, resistance, and identity.
This paper argues that the meaning and experience of military violence cannot be limited to the frameworks of
its architects. Thus while the imposition of Israel’s assault on Nablus and the Jenin camp reflect a logic of urban
warfare in the service of a ‘war on terror,’ Palestinians understood the event differently. In particular, they saw
the violence of the Edjteyah as another step in the unfolding processes of an expansionist settler state committed
to the erasure of Palestine and the Palestinians. Palestinians thus rejected Israel’s military logic of war by
recasting the attack in nationalist terms that saw the destruction of the built environment as an existential
matter. In this framework, the Edjteyah represented yet another effort by the Israeli state to annihilate the
Palestinian people through the destruction of their material existence. Thus individual, national, and international
acts of construction and reconstruction in Nablus and Jenin have constituted a fundamental act of affirmation
and resistance in which the built environment is an extension of the Palestinian national body.
This paper begins with a critical analysis of the urbanization of warfare through the lens of Israel’s “walking
through walls” policy in the Occupied West Bank. Moving beyond the logic of military planning, this paper
situates Israel’s destruction of the built environment within the everyday experience of that violence among
Palestinians. Particular focus is placed on its effects on the meaning and experience of home. It also examines
how individual and community responses to the destruction are repositioned as acts of resistance and struggle
that resonate with nationalist frames. More than a mere site of destruction/reconstruction, the built
environment in this context is itself the object of struggle.

Abstract Index #: 877
HOW HISTORIC PRESERVATION EFFORTS COPE WITH REGIONAL DISPARITIES
Abstract System ID#: 637
Individual Paper

MIYAZATO, Takamasa [Kanazawa Institute of Technology] t.miyazato.ortf@gmail.com, primary author
TANI, Akihiko [Kanazawa Institute of Technology] dr-tani@neptune.kanazawa-it.ac.jp
This study addresses regional disparities as a social equity issue. Since Japan now faces serious regional
disparities by which the nation is divided into two sets of regions: flourishing metropolitan regions and
diminishing local regions. Despite the persistent government policy to promote local regions, the situation has
shown little signs of improvement. We argue that historic preservation could be an effective tool to cope with
this problem and attempt to provide a practical case of Kaga Hashidate. Kaga Hashidate is located on the west
coast of Ishikawa Prefecture and known for its historic buildings and environment. It was designates as a
National Historic District in 2005 and has entered the 10th year. Its population has been stabilized and its living
environment has been improved considerably.
Japan is a centralized nation as Tokyo has 29% of national population and its GDP surpasses that of Canada. After
the WWII the growth of industries in metropolitan regions was pursued at the expense of migration from local
regions which were regarded as a mere supplier of young labor force. As a result local regions have suffered
from a loss of younger population, have faced aging population problems and have even suffered from fatal
population loss in many small villages. This problem has been well known and discussed how to cope with it but
no effective measures have evolved yet.
In the postwar period of Japan economic growth has been achieved with wooden houses being replaced by
concrete buildings and automobile-based city expanding outward. Through the process most metropolitan and
fast growing regions on the Pacific Ocean side of Japan have lost historic environment and townscape. On the
contrary local regions on the Japan Sea side and mountainous regions have seen much slower growth with their
historic environment remained. They were once regarded as the backward regions as the nation enjoyed the
fruits of economic growth. However, after the 1970's when Japan's rapid economic growth has slowed down and
negative  impact of fast growth has been realized, historic heritages and traditional culture left in local regions
have been realized as significant assets and area with historic environment have become a desirable place to
attract tourists and migrants from large city. Therefore, historic preservation has emerged as a significant
policy measures to promote local economy and hence to decrease regional disparities.
This study focuses on community development and vitalization efforts through historic preservation in KagaHashidate and attempts to present (1) the achievements of historic preservation projects in 10 years, (2) the
effects of community development by residents and university students, and (3) a prospect for historic
preservation projects in Kaga Hashidate. Then, we argue that historic preservation is an effective alternative
measures to revitalize local regions that suffer from regional disparities as historic districts with historic
environment and townscape being a leading area in coping with disparity issues.
References
 Tani, A. & Masuta, T., “Revitalization of Kanazawa through historic preservation,” Proceedings of the
International Symposium on City Planning 2000, City Planning Institute of Japan, 2000.
 Tani, A., Kawakami, M. and Masuta, T., “Kanazawa Creating a Livable City thorough Historic
Preservation” in International urban_planning Settings: Lessons of Success, edited by F. Willams &
Robert J. Stimson, JAI, 2001.
 Tani, A., Tsuchida, T. & Endo, A., “Historical Preservation through a Participatory Process --- An Empirical
Analysis for Kaga Hashidate ---,” Presented at the Association of European School of Planning
Conference in 2005.
 Tani, A., Masuta, T. & Nagano, S., “Restoration of Historical Area Struck by Major Earthquake,”
Presented at the Association of Collegiate School of Planning Conference in 2008.

Abstract Index #: 878
BEYOND ACCESS: CONTESTING THE "PRIVATIZATION" OF CONEY ISLAND
Abstract System ID#: 713
Individual Paper

RIVERO, Juan [Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey] jj_rivero@yahoo.com
This paper examines the relation between intangible collective goods and popular conceptions of public space
through a case study of the recent redevelopment of Coney Island. In doing so, it explains a preservationist
controversy that centered on private structures and spaces to which opponents of the redevelopment plan
assigned a public dimension.
Coney Island, during the first half of the 20th century, was one of the most popular amusement destinations in
the world, comprising an agglomeration of open amusement parks, arcades, and vendors, abutting a beach-front
boardwalk. During the second half of the century, Coney Island’s popularity declined, and disinvestment left the
area with numerous underutilized buildings and vacant lots. Although Coney Island has remained a beloved,
affordable, and well-frequented place for recreation, these development opportunities eventually led the City to
formulate a redevelopment plan that would change its zoning to allow higher densities and less restrictive uses.
The Coney Island redevelopment plan inspired opposition from advocates concerned that the proposed
development would “privatize” the area. The City’s assurances of continued public access to the beach, the
boardwalk, and the amusement grounds did nothing to allay these fears. My research shows that the advocates’
conception of public space exceeded the question of access and encompassed a quality of public interaction.
Describing the erosion of the public sphere variously as a loss of “diversity” or “authenticity”, the advocates
pointed to an essential Coney Island experience that depended on built structures and architectural features that
the City’s plan either overlooked or regarded as liabilities. These findings shed light on the ways in which city
planning struggles to address the complex relation between the form and function of the built environment. In so
doing, they call for a more nuanced conception of public space and its relation to conventional redevelopment
approaches.
References
 Anderson, B. (2009). Affective atmospheres. Emotion, Space and Society, 2(2), 77–81.
 Campo, D. (2013). The Accidental Playground: Brooklyn Waterfront Narratives of the Undesigned and
Unplanned. New York: Fordham University Press.
 Reichl, A. J. (1999). Reconstructing Times Square: Politics and Culture in Urban Development. Univ Pr of
Kansas.

Abstract Index #: 879
COMMUTER CORRIDOR REVITALIZATION
Abstract System ID#: 729
Poster
GHAHRAMANI, Arash [Jackson State University] arash.ghahramani@gmail.com, presenting author, primary
author
AGHILI, Ramina [Jackson State University] ramina.aghili@gmail.com
One of the important streets in Jackson, MS, which has a strong potential to become a “Complete Street”, is the
“State Street”. The Public Transit in such a Commuter Corridor could be considered not only as an urban service
for the commuters, but also as an asset to the city of Jackson and all its residents. For this purpose, the different
elements and features of a Complete Street need to be wisely taken into account. The physical elements are
sidewalk, bike path, public transit system (e.g. Bus Rapid Transit (BRT)), and also Transit-Oriented Developments
(TOD).
The stretch, which is going to be considered in this project is from East County Line Rd. to somewhere close to
the Interstate 20, so that most of the population who commute to downtown Jackson, will be able to make use of
the system.

Next step is to analyze the current conditions and the city characteristic – with the help of some case studies all
around the nation - in order to:
Do the planning consideration, and BRT branding and marketing,
Design running ways, stations, and stops (facilities),
Understand the social, environment, and economic  impact, and
Plan for financing and implementing the proposed plan.
With these considerations and methodology, and also with the existing design criteria and guidelines, there will
be a proposed model for the State Street in the mentioned stretch, focusing on two main TOD’s and some
smaller stations.
It’s clear that there is not enough demand to implement such a system at the moment; the idea is to create that
demand. So, the current data won’t support our proposal and therefore the approach would be proactive.
References
 http://onthemap.ces.census.gov/
 http://www.cmpdd.org/
 http://census.gov/
 AARP. 2009. Planning Complete Streets for an Aging America. AARP Public Policy Institute. Washington,
D.C.
 "The National Complete Streets Coalition" & "Smart Growth America". 2015. The Best Complete Street
Policies of 2014.

Abstract Index #: 880
THINKING OUTSIDE THE HALF-MILE CIRCLE: ESTABLISHING UPPER BOUNDS OF TRANSIT-SUPPORTIVE
NEIGHBORHOODS
Abstract System ID#: 775
Individual Paper
PETHERAM, Susan [University of Utah] s.petheram@utah.edu
In both planning practice and research, it is a nearly accepted tenet that the one-half mile circle around a transit
station serves as the upper limits for transit-oriented development (TOD) and ridership capture (Guerra, Cervero,
and Tischler 2011). However, this is based primarily on walking distances and transit riders access stations using
multiple modes, including bike and feeder transit. Some counter the half-mile is an over-estimation that does not
reflect actual network-based walking distances, while others feel it is under-estimation when factors such as
urban design, housing density, and employment density are considered (Canepa 2007).
A substantial body of literature exists regarding the price effects of light rail transit accessibility on residential
properties. Findings indicate proximity to transit generally imparts a positive impact on the value of surrounding
development (Bartholomew & Ewing 2011; Fogarty et al. 2008). However, discussion of the potential variations in
TOD catchment area by  land_use type, as well as station area type, is largely missing from the body of research
evaluating light rail station area. Additionally, few use market response of different property types to establish
the upper bounds of transit-supportive neighborhood, which extend beyond development in the core station
area. As such, the implications these may have on  land_use and urban design policy for these broader transitsupportive area are absent as well. This paper seeks to close some of these gaps in the research.
Urban design, surrounding  land_use context, and socio-economic factors such as income vary by station area,
affecting how much value proximity to a station imparts. Using a hedonic model and hierarchical linear modeling
to capture these variations, we estimate the association between TRAX, the light rail system serving Salt Lake
County, Utah, and the value of different residential property types. We present findings on single-family
detached, single-family attached, and multi-family dwellings.

Controlling for structural, neighborhood, and location characteristics, our preliminary results suggest the area of
influence for light stations extends out to one and one-quarter miles, with value varying by residential property
type. These results indicate a need for comprehensively addressing the design and planning of transit-supportive
neighborhoods, rather than just station area TOD. Beyond  land_use regulations, planners must consider urban
design elements such as streetscape, building form and function, and parking standards, as well as linkages to
bike routes, feeder transit, and open space networks to facilitate effective transit-supportive neighborhood.
References
 Bartholomew, K., & Ewing, R. (2011). Hedonic price effects of pedestrian-and transit-oriented
development. Journal of Planning Literature, 26(1), 18-34.
 Canepa, B. (2007). Bursting the bubble: Determining the transit-oriented development's walkable limits.
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 1992(-1), 28-34.
 Fogarty, N. A., Eaton, N., Belzer, D., & Ohland, G. with the Center for Transit-Oriented Development.
(2008). Capturing the value of transit. Federal Transit Administration. Washington, D.D.: Department of
Transportation.
 Guerra, E., Cervero, R., & Tischler, D. (2011). The Half-Mile Circle: Does It Best Represent Transit Station
Catchments? Berkeley, CA. University of California’s Transportation Center.

Abstract Index #: 881
THE DESIGN MOMENT MISSED IN KANSAS CITY: BUILT FORM ON AN URBAN CORRIDOR
Abstract System ID#: 815
Individual Paper
FRISCH, Michael [University of Missouri, Kansas City] frischm@umkc.edu
Cities rarely undergo systematic changes in built form. Instead year-by-year changes are more organic. Kostof
(1992) notes “cities are caught between a balancing act between destruction and preservation. As long as the
management of the balance has not been formalized, citizens will seek their own advantage within a loose frame
of social and economic forces” (290). In sharp contrast, design moments are those times of planned expansion
and redevelopment decisions that frame the later periods of organic growth. These moments are driven by large
scale socio-political forces and include policy of nation-building and urban renewal, responses to natural
disasters and war reconstruction, as well as adoption of new technologies such as electricity, the railroad, and the
automobile (Wagner and Frisch 2012). To understand a city and its form, one must uncover the design moments
of the past. What exists today is the result of organic growth decisions made within this frame.
I apply an analysis of Kansas City design moments to explain the existing built form on the Broadway corridor in
Central Kansas City. Some of these design moments have been well documented. The Broadway corridor began
as part of the city beautiful era Parks and Boulevards plan. Broadway today is a commercial corridor, and its form
and design contradict its origin. Later design moments then explain this transition. Gotham shows how the
combination of racial segregation, real estate development and expressway planning led to metropolitan sprawl
in Kansas City (2014). While Gotham’s broad frame explains the overall policy trend, other design moments
reflected in city plans, explain the resultant form. Using a parcel-by-parcel analysis, I relate existing form to an
underlying explanatory frame referencing a large scale urban process.
The design moment analysis shows that existing conditions on Broadway were the result of planned depopulation. While large scale racial policy of school segregation and expressway building may explain the
overall development of Kansas City, Broadway’s current condition is just as much a result of changes in planning
and  land_use regulations as applied to the parcel scale. The analysis illustrate how political economic decisions
made within an urban regime may be read as patterns in the built form of the corridor (Kostof 1991). This result
supports Gundar’s (2011) proposition that urban design is still very much within urban_planning.

References
 Gotham, KF. 2014. Race, Real Estate, and Uneven Development: The Kansas City Experience, 1900-2010.
Second Edition. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
 Gundar, M. 2011. Is Urban Design still urban_planning, An Explanation and Response. Journal of Planning
Education and Research. 31,2: 184-195.
 Kostof, S. 1991. The City Shaped. Boston, MA: Little, Brown +Co
 Kostof, S. 1992. The City Assembled. Boston, MA: Little, Brown + Co.
 Wagner, Jacob and Frisch, Michael (eds). 2012. New Orleans and the Design Moment. New York, NY:
Routledge.

Abstract Index #: 882
RETHINKING HOUSING: THE CHALLENGE OF URBANISM IN ASIAN-MEGACITIES
Abstract System ID#: 827
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session
AL, Stefan [University of Pennsylvania] stefanal@design.upenn.edu
HACK, Gary [University of Pennsylvania] gahack@design.upenn.edu
RYAN, Brent [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] bdr@mit.edu
With their urban populations soaring, Asian mega-cities are rapidly expanding their housing stock. However,
much of this housing takes on repetitive urban forms — typically cruciform-shaped towers placed in a park or on
top of a podium-mall — with little consideration to place-making. Much of this housing is governed by reductive
national laws and embedded policy that restrict design alternatives and contribute to design homogeneity.
These regulations prioritize housing unit standards and exposure to environment amenities but ignore other
normative urban design values such as city image, orientation, sustainability, and livability. How might the mass
production of housing be reformed or improved to generate better urbanism without resorting to historicism or
reducing housing production for populations in need? This panel discusses the urbanism of Asian's residential
estates and explores how they could contribute to making unique urban places.

Abstract Index #: 883
SUSTAINING comminuty THROUGH HAPPINESS
Abstract System ID#: 858
Individual Paper
CLOUTIER, Scott [Arizona State University] scott.cloutier@asu.edu
Happiness is commonly thought of as an individual characteristic for which a person is solely responsible.
However, happiness is also a community characteristic influenced by factors external to the individual (Balducci &
Checci, 2009; Welsch, 2006). This paper sets the context for community level happiness as an alternative
objective for sustainable community development and planning. First, a review of historical and current
sustainable development frameworks is performed, including strengths and limitations of each. Community
planning and development has flirted on the edge of happy neighborhood but a more focused approach could
be the key to a refined framework. Next, the Sustainability Through Happiness Framework (STHF) is detailed as a
conceptual path for sustainable community development. To move toward a sustainable future, we need to
actively participate in happiness visioning, engage project participants (e.g. residents, stakeholders, from all walks
of life, culture, status and beliefs), inventory happiness profits, use system planning and sustainability
interventions. Finally, the paper concludes with the benefits and challenges of a framework focused on
happiness. Ultimately, happiness offers a universal measure focused on the quality of human life and a
community development framework that may translate to a sustainable future.

References
 Balducci, A., & Checchi, D. (2009). Happiness and quality of city life: The Case of Milan, the Richest Italian
City. International Planning Studies, 14(1), 25-64.
 Welsch, H. (2006). Environment and happiness: Valuation of air pollution using life satisfaction data.
Ecological Economics, 58(4), 801-813.

Abstract Index #: 884
REDESIGNING THE LANDSCAPES OF PUBLIC SPACE USE
Abstract System ID#: 860
Individual Paper
EHRENFEUCHT, Renia [University of New Orleans] rehrenfe@uno.edu
Urban residents value different forms of pop up and informal urbanism. Food trucks, temporary art installations,
street art and parades help create dynamic urban environments (Franck and Stevens, 2007). Yet, a desire for
more public activity and a revitalized urban core has been accompanied by close scrutiny to and tensions over
activities such as street vending and busking. In response, local governments have revised regulations governing
public space uses, but these ordinances change rather than reduce barriers to street use. In doing so, they have
privileged the interests of more influential new street users over those who have been operating informally
(Martin, 2014). Although urban design scholars and practitioners have demanded better public space design with
the intent to create people-oriented public spaces (Carmona et al, 2010), too little attention has been paid to
redesigning ordinary streets to accommodate a wide range of daily activities (Ehrenfeucht and Loukaitou-Sideris,
2010).
This paper investigates street vending, a phenomenon that has operated informally in U.S. city for decades. In
the last ten years, a growing industry of food truck operators has demanded permission to operate on U.S.
streets. This led to new regulatory initiatives that focus attention on food trucks as well as other types of street
vending. This paper investigates how two public space planning techniques, street design and public space
regulation, influence how public space activities unfold. This paper will address the following questions: How
does street design influence street vending and the interactions with other street users? How does the regulatory
structure influence street vending and the interaction with other street users? Chicago and New Orleans are two
cities that reformed their street food vending regulations in the 2010s. This paper draws on two field research
projects, one that observed food trucks operating in the Chicago Loop in fall 2013 and a second that observed
food vendors operating at second lines—a Sunday parading tradition that occurs throughout much of the year—
in New Orleans during 2014-2015, along with an analysis of the ordinances governing public space use. Findings
from these projects indicate that small urban spaces can create sites where activities occur with minimum impact
on activities such as walking. In addition, vendors, customers and other public space users exhibit a tendency to
self organization and an ability adapt to local conditions, confirming other research showing self organization in
public space (e.g., Morales, 2010).
This paper has relevance for planning practice and theory. As city strive to accommodate more activities, close
attention to how public activities play out shows how design interventions can reduce conflicts and facilitate
layered public space uses as well as better ensure regulations meet intended objectives. These research projects
also examines a process of re-formalization of informal activities that has been occurring as urban residents have
sought more dynamic public spaces. Although some food vendors have demanded legitimacy in the form of
permits, the structure of permits privileges certain users at the expense of others and impedes activities of street
food vendors who continue to work informally. The food vending regulations also continue to privilege stationary
businesses and create restrictive regulations that run counter to ongoing vending practices. As a result,
regulation has had the paradoxical effect of making vending harder for some vendors who operated without
permits prior to the new era of legitimacy. This research suggests the possibility for urban design and self
regulation to address public space concerns in ways that counter the disparate  impact of regulation as a
technique to legitimize informal activities.

References
 Carmona, M., Heath, T., Oc, T., & Tiesdell, S. (2010). Public Places Urban Spaces: The Dimensions of
Urban Design. Burlington: Elsevier Science.
 Ehrenfeucht, R., & Loukaitou-Sideris, A. (2010). Planning urban sidewalks: Infrastructure, daily life and
destinations. Journal of Urban Design, 15(4), 459-471. DOI 10.1080/13574809.2010.502333
 Franck, K. A., & Stevens, Q. (2007). Loose space: Possibility and diversity in urban life. London:
Routledge.
 Martin, N. (2014). Food fight! Immigrant street vendors, gourmet food trucks and the differential
valuation of creative producers in Chicago. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 38(5),
1867-1883. DOI 10.1111/1468-2427.12169
 Morales, A. (2010). Planning and the self-organization of marketplaces. Journal of Planning Education
and Research, 30(2), 182-197. DOI 10.1177/0739456X10385561

Abstract Index #: 885
TYPE IN TRANSITION: A NEW ZONING CODE SHAPES HOUSING FOR BETTER AND FOR WORSE, A DINGBAT
APARTMENT COMPARATIVE CASE STUDY
Abstract System ID#: 870
Individual Paper
FALLETTA, Liz [University of Southern California] falletta@price.usc.edu
Urban planners work to ensure that housing of the necessary types and quantities can be produced in their city,
using zoning, development standards, design review and other tools to balance housing preferences with
community need. These policy literally shape housing, both as physical forms and as financial investments, but
most do not take design and development drivers into account (Carmona 2001, Talen 2012). Resulting
disconnects can skew housing production and result in less desirable housing types. Frameworks that bring
planning, design and development perspectives into relation and identify and characterize the impact of planning
policy on design and development outcomes have the potential to improve housing production from all three
points of view.
To create these types of resources, I performed a cross-disciplinary analysis of significant Los Angeles housing
design precedents and their related development types, all approved either by-right or by-variance by urban
planners. Though the projects studied have similar physical characteristics and are located in close proximity to
one another, professionals involved in housing production rarely look at them side-by-side. Consequently, these
development type vs. design precedent pairings are usually viewed by those in the industry as maximally
different, i.e., they assume that if projects excel from the point of view of one field they necessarily fail from the
perspective of others. This paper examines whether this perceived divergence is actually the case and asks what
can be learned from looking at these works comparatively rather than in isolation: (1) Do the planning policy
that shaped these projects support good design and profitable development? (2) Do the exceptions they were
granted from planning regulations create design and development value? (3) Do these projects employ strategies
that are beneficial from more than one disciplinary perspective that could be used to improve housing outcomes
from all points of view?
This paper presents a comparative case study of the National Boulevard Apartments, designed and developed by
architect Raymond Kappe, and the developer-built apartment building directly across the street (Kappe 1995).
Both are hybrid types constructed in the mid-1950s as Los Angeles builders were struggling to adapt existing
housing models to the increased allowable density and stricter development standards contained in the city’s
still-new 1946 zoning code. In this case, good market fundamentals coupled with difficult hillside sites, spurred
the transition from Courtyard Garden Apartments (repetitive low-rise buildings grouped around landscaped
courtyards) to Dingbat Apartments (low-rise “stucco box” structures organized around parking and car access).
Dingbats were mass-produced across large swaths of the LA Basin from the late 1950s through the 1970s,
addressing significant housing demand, but without the character, amenity and intimate scale of earlier housing
types (Chase 2000).

The introduction of Los Angeles’ 1946 zoning code made tested building types more challenging to build, and
made it difficult to transition these known types to higher densities. Consequently, new housing models such as
the Dingbat were used, models that arguably provided less quality of life for residents and which are now less
valued. Close analysis of the case study, though, suggests that it didn’t have to be this way. Research is ongoing,
but, the cross-disciplinary strategies demonstrated by both subjects, i.e., strategies that simultaneously support
urban_planning, design and development goals, identify ways in which the code could have encouraged the
translation of the desirable qualities of known housing types into new forms more suitable to the city’s future
needs.
References
 Carmona, Matthew. (2001). Housing Design Quality, Through Policy, Guidance and Review. London, UK:
Spon Press.
 Chase, John. (2000). Glitter Stucco and Dumpster Diving, Reflections on Building Production in the
Vernacular City. New York, NY: Verso.
 Kappe, Raymond. (1995). Interview by Andrew B. Smith. Los Angeles, CA: UCLA Library, Center for Oral
History Research.
 Talen, Emily. (2012). City Rules, How Regulations Affect Urban Form. Washington, DC: Island Press.

Abstract Index #: 886
TOWARDS A RECONCEPTUALIZATION OF THE ‘EVERYDAY’ IN urban_planning AND DESIGN DISCOURSE
Abstract System ID#: 978
Individual Paper
IMEOKPARIA, Timothy [University of New Mexico] timeokpa@unm.edu, presenting author, primary author
SWEET, Elizabeth L [Temple Univeristy-Geography and Urban Studies] elsweet1@gmail.com
The ‘everyday’ has become a touchstone in urban_planning and design discourse (Caulfield, 1994; Chase, et al.
1999; and Dell and Ghose, 2009).). We, however, contend that there is an inadequate theorization of the
everyday in urban_planning and design discourse that results in a trivialization of the concept and a loss of its
value as an analytic category. As currently deployed in the urban_planning and design literature, the everyday is
frequently conceptualized not as the processes by which the ordinary material world of marginalized peoples are
transformed, but instead a system employed by elites to mark the everyday as a world of significant symbols. The
outside elites assign meaning and value to the everyday. In its fetishization of the ordinary, the discourse creates
a false contrast between the consumptive and inauthentic landscapes of global capital and the authenticity of
“everyday life” in underprivileged comminuty. The ideology of the everyday is based on a fallacy, which views
the processes such environments come about as independent of the material conditions of the system that
produce them. Conceptually, it adds little to urban_planning and design practice and thought because it fails to
further our understanding of the materializations and practices out of which the everyday emerges. Rather, the
discourse functions to institutionalize and mystify by suppressing the materiality and contingency of the
quotidian experience it claims to celebrate. We argue that this reification of the ‘everyday’ that naturalizes in
urban_planning and design discourse, and the socio-political and the empirical dimensions of a process driven by
the logics that inform capitalist spatial production and reproduction must be challenged.
This paper draws on an analysis of two Latino business districts, La villita in Chicago and the “Italian” Market
(which is now really a Mexican Market) in Philadelphia in the context of the “critique of everyday life” derived
from Marxist critique of commodity fetishism and reification. The hope is to develop alternative epistemologies
and methodologies for querying the everyday. If the concept of everyday life is to advance reflective practice,
then urban planners and designers need to give more thought to how the concept is used in urban_planning and
design discourse. The idea is to avoid the tendency “to naturalize or reify its theoretical objects.” We conclude
that the myth of everyday life should be reconceptualized to illuminate its underbelly-- the embedded inner
structure of the capitalist system that is often mystified by a failure to forge a link between an aestheticdescriptive analysis and radical critique.

References
 Caulfield, J. (1994). City form and everyday life: Toronto's gentrification and critical social practice.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press
 Chase, J., Crawford, M., & Kaliski, J. (1999). Everyday urbanism: Featuring John Chase. New York, N.Y:
Monacelli Press.
 Dell, C., & Ghose, P. S. L. (2009). Tacit urbanism: Hawkers and the production of space in everyday
Kolkata. Rotterdam: Post Editions.
 Hou, J. (2010). Insurgent public space: Guerrilla urbanism and the remaking of contemporary city. New
York: Routledge.
 Lefebvre, H., & Goonewardena, K. (2008). Space, difference, everyday life: Reading Henri Lefebvre. New
York: Routledge Sandywell, Barry (2004). The Myth of Everyday Life: Towards a Heterology of the
Ordinary, Cultural studies, Vol. 18, No. 2/3, March/May, pp. 160-180.

Abstract Index #: 887
POP-UPS: A NEW TRIGGER TO PUSH UP LAND VALUE?
Abstract System ID#: 1052
Individual Paper
SCHALLER, Susanna [The City College of New York] cweclasses@gmail.com, presenting author
GUINAND, Sandra [Graduate Center, CUNY] sguinand@gc.cuny.edu
The obsolete waterfront industrial landscape has been the fulcrum of large-scale restructuring and urban
redevelopment efforts in city like New York, Barcelona, London and also Philadelphia (Desfor, Laidley, Stevens
and Schubert 2011). Through an analysis of the pop up urban landscapes on the Philadelphia Waterfront, this
paper examines how entrepreneurial urban actors, such as municipal officials, urban_planning agencies and
landscape designers, strategically harness the “urban tactics” (De Certeau 1990) deployed in one’s everyday life.
We argue that it uses and materializes innovative (re)actions meant to evade the penetration of market-relations
in order to reactivate and revalorize “obsolete” urban landscapes. This paper is grounded in a qualitative analysis
of Philadephia’s waterfront and pop-up projects based on interviews (including photographic ones), official plans
and reports, as well as web-based marketing or advocacy materials.
The spatial interstices that vacant land on industrial waterfronts present, afford planners and urban designers the
opportunity to experiment with new uses, to test design ideas and techniques and to harness entrepreneurial
energy to catalyze economic activity. Yet, the reclamation of vacant land by local residents, especially in
neighborhoods that suffered targeted disinvestment, to create social, expressive, and political spaces, such as
community gardens, has its origins in the struggle to forge a sense of collective identity and “community
empowerment” (Schmelzkopf 2002). These spaces retained “use value” in the urban landscape (Cummings 2001).
Nonetheless, these contested spaces form part of the “informal city” and are conceptualized as ephemeral and
transitory (Demisi 2015); they exist only as long as they remain invisible to real estate capital and entrepreneurial
actors, able to envision and realize exchange value from these spaces. Landscape design in coordination with new
urban renewal/redevelopment plans, such as the Philadelphia pop-ups on the waterfront, we argue, appropriate,
formalize and commodify informal urban practices through which individual as well as organized groups have
sought to carve out social and expressive (affective) spaces in their urban neighborhood. The notion of
“community development,” which resonates as a politically progressive term, in this case, acts as a euphemism
for the creation of profit through revalorization of land and real estate. These form of strategic interventions to
redevelop urban assets, like waterfronts, needs to be addressed and assessed especially in the urban_planning
field as it undermines equity and social justice in the city (Fainstein 2010). More perniciously, in homing in on
precisely those instances of “resistance” and making visible our individual and collective creativity and inclination
to try to evade capital’s colonization of our everyday, these “alternative” countercultural “progressive political
values” are precisely instrumentalized to add value to urban space (land).

References
 DE CERTEAU, M. (1990) L’invention du quotidian, Paris: Gallimard
 DESFOR, G., LAIDLEY, J., STEVENS Q., SCHUBERT D. (eds.) (2011) Transforming Urban Waterfronts Fixity
and Flow, New York and London: Routledge.
 DEMISI, J. (2015) “Limitation of the temporary landscape and abandonment”, Journal of urban history,
41, pp. 279-293.
 FAINSTEIN, S. (2010) The Just City, Cornell University Press.
 SCHMELZKOPF, K. (2002) “Incommensurability,  land_use, and the Right to Space: Community Gardens in
New York City”, Urban Geography, 23, pp. 323-343.

Index #: 888
THE URBAN DESIGN IMPLICATIONS OF A SOCIAL SUSTAINABILITY AGENDA FOR U.S. city
Abstract System ID#: 1074
Individual Paper
LARICE, Michael [University of Utah] larice@arch.utah.edu
Correctly voiced by sustainability advocates and the sustainability press, social sustainability is the least
understood and the least operational of sustainability theory's three legged stool that includes environment
and economic foci. environment sustainability has long been the leader in grabbing attention and helping to
reshape the practice of the built environment professions. In the United States, both economic and social
sustainability have been laggards in focusing attention on those two other legs, compared to the sustainability
agendas found in Europe, Canada and Australia. The social democracies and the welfare state system common
throughout Europe have helped usher in economic sustainability agendas and the operationalization of
associated practices that seek to provide economic well-being for future generations. program associated with
an economic sustainability agenda include: improving access to housing and housing finance, wealth
redistribution program and the evolution of the welfare state, economic development practices, and reeducation/vocational education to create greater levels of human capital. Not surprising then, the last of the
sustainability triumvirate to receive attention was social sustainability.
Early conceptions of social sustainability included ideas about: social cohesion, social reproduction, community
stability and succession, community development, socially relevant placemaking, and quality of life concerns that
make places livable. More recently, the UK and Australia have led the way in firming up relative definitions of
social sustainability and elucidating a social sustainability agenda related to the built environment. This paper will
utilize the definition of social sustainability, and its relation to the built environment, offered up by a British social
organization called: Social Life. This definition (with its four part framework) will be utilized then as a means of
categorizing social sustainability components in the built environment, and assessing the potential for a social
sustainability agenda for US city and neighborhood based on this definition. The author expects the research
to show that a revised definition of social sustainability may be timely to accurately gauge the social sustainability
needs of people in US city, as different cultures of spatial practice and everyday life distinguish life in the UK
and life in the US. But even more probable is a differentiated operationalization of social sustainability practice in
the built environment to reflect these lifestyle differences, as well as differences in morphology, built quality, and
absence of social space in the US city. This follows recent theory on differential planning culture, and the newly
emerging theory of differential design culture between nations.
For Social Life, social sustainability is "a process for creating sustainable, successful places that promote
wellbeing, by understanding what people need from the places they live and work. Social sustainability combines
design of the physical realm with design of the social world – infrastructure to support social and cultural life,
social amenities, system for citizen engagement and space for people and places to evolve." These four
categories will be used to identify case study exemplars around which a grounded theory of urban design practice
for social sustainability can emerge with respect to US lifestyles, city, and neighborhood. The four categories
are: 1. Infrastructure and amenities to support social and cultural life; 2. Spaces and rituals for social and cultural
life; 3. Spaces and processes of voice and influence; and 4. Spaces where comminuty can evolve and grow.

Through matching exemplar cases to these categories, the author expects an emergent grounded theory of
America-based socially sustainable urban design practice, as well as a platform for the continued evolution of
urban design practice.
References
 Woodcraft, S. with Bacon, N., Caistor-Arendar, L., and Hackett, T. 2011. Design for Social Sustainablity.
London: Social Life.
 Thomas, R. ed. 2003. Sustainable Urban Design: An environment Approach. London: Spon Press.
 Barton, H. ed. 2000. Sustainable comminuty: The Potential for Eco-Neighborhoods. London: Earthscan
Press.
 Portney, K. 2003. Taking Sustainable city Seriously: Economic Development, the Environment, and
Quality of Life in American city. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
 Wheeler, S. 2004. Planning for Sustainability: Creating Livable, Equitable, and Ecological comminuty.
London: Routledge

Abstract Index #: 889
URBAN GROWTH AND HUMAN DECAY: EXAMINING RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN EXPANDING city AND BURIAL
PRACTICE IN CENTRAL TEXAS
Abstract System ID#: 1130
Individual Paper
SOWELL, Jason [University of Texas at Austin] jsowell@austin.utexas.edu
Cemeteries in Central Texas lack sufficient space to dispose of existing residents once they die. As urban growth
has rendered these cemeteries landlocked and unable to expand, traditional burial practices stress the
cemeteries’ limited capacity, consume material resources, detach the body from the nutrient cycle, and
potentially contaminate groundwater and soil with embalming fluids. As plots in cemeteries within larger city
decrease in number and increase in cost, individuals from larger metropolitan area purchase less expensive plots
in smaller towns. These purchases contribute to the lack of disposition or burial space at a regional scale; and
force smaller municipalities to impose restrictions on plot sales and request land donations to develop and
expand their cemetery network. The projected doubling of the region’s population by 2050 ensures further strain
to an already deficient cemetery network. Utilizing Science and Technology Studies (STS) and Urban Political
Ecology frameworks, this paper examines relationships between dynamic urban growth and the cemetery’s
social, technical, and biophysical processes within Central Texas. Proposing the cemetery as a technology, the
paper will utilize geospatial analysis, interviews, and a review of obdurate  land_use policy and burial practices to
illustrate challenges facing cemetery design.
References
 Harrison, Robert Pogue. The Dominion of the Dead. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press,
2003.
 Heynen, Nik, Kaika, Maria, & Swyngedouw, E. In the Nature of city: Urban Political Ecology and the
politics of urban metabolism. New York: Routledge, 2006.
 Hommels, Anique. Unbuilding city: Obduracy in Urban Socio-Technical Change. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2005.
 Star, Susan L. The Ethnography of Infrastructure. American Behavioral Scientist, 43(377) 1999.
 Yalom, Marilyn. Boston and New The American Resting Place: Four Hundred Years of History Through
Our Cemeteries and Burial Grounds York: Houghton Mifflin, 2008.

Abstract Index #: 890
NEIGHBORHOOD SIGNS AS SYMBOLS OF PLACE IDENTITY: A SOCIO-CULTURAL-POLITICAL TAXONOMY OF SIGNS
Abstract System ID#: 1191
Pre-organized Session: Signs as Symbols of Cultural Landscape

MEHTA, Vikas [University of Cincinnati] vikas.mehta@uc.edu
Signs are an important component of a place-based communication system. Signs contribute significantly to the
experience of place, particularly commercial space such as the neighborhood main street. Beyond their
commercial or regulatory and sensory visual value, signs are symbols: they communicate socio-cultural and even
political messages. Signs quintessentially represent and mediate between, what Zukin (1991) calls the visual
economy of the landscape and market culture. Signs act as material traces that provide a direct spatial semiotic—
a visual sociology of place (Krase and Shortell, 2011). Thus, we can read a place by reading the signs in the place.
The purpose of the paper is twofold. The main goal is to develop a socio-cultural-political taxonomy of signs but
as a corollary we also want to test the hypothesis that the signs on the neighborhood’s commercial streets (or
other commercial space) represent the neighborhood’s socio-cultural and political character, social practices and
collective identity.
We first develop a theory and present a classification of signs into a 16-part taxonomy of socio-cultural-political
constructs that is reflective of the social, cultural and political messages generated and promoted by the signs on
the main street. The taxonomy acts as a medium for a spatial semiotic analysis to understand the neighborhood’s
character, social practices and collective identity.
Next, the research employs a mixed method approach that combines visual documentation and qualitative visual
analysis with surveys. We apply the 16-part taxonomy for a reading of the neighborhood to three socioeconomically varied neighborhood commercial streets in Cincinnati, OH. Through a visual analysis of the signs we
determine the social practices and collective identity of each neighborhood. Next, we survey residents and
workers in these neighborhood and another general sample of the non-residential population of these
neighborhoods to determine how accurately the taxonomy of signs represents the character, social practices and
collective identity of each neighborhood.
Although the research is ongoing our preliminary findings reveal that by looking at signs through the proposed
taxonomy one can really read the neighborhood by reading the signs in the neighborhood. Testing our
hypotheses, preliminary surveys indicate two things, first, that signs act as powerful communication system for
relaying and representing community social practices, and second, that signs reveal collective identities rather
than a singular collective identity for the neighborhood. But perhaps more importantly, we are finding that the
reading of neighborhood signs via the taxonomy has numerous other benefits for urban designers and planners.
This reading elevates the understanding of the neighborhood beyond mere visual and sensory aspects (that
occurs as a first reading of signs) to the more meaningful understanding of strengths and needs of
neighborhoods. The taxonomy acts as a powerful evaluative tool that represents the neighborhood’s place
identity by revealing aspects of power, cohesion, diversity, education and economy.
References
 Krase, J. and Shortell, T. (2011). On The Spatial Semiotics of Vernacular Landscapes in Global city.
Visual Communication, 10 (3), 367-400.
 Zukin, S. (1991). Landscapes of Power: from Detroit to Disney World. Berkeley: University of California
Press.

Abstract Index #: 891
MINDING THE GAP: URBAN DESIGN LESSONS FROM THE LOS ANGELES 30-YEAR TRANSPORTATION PLAN
Abstract System ID#: 1228
Individual Paper
BERNEY, Rachel [University of Southern California] berney@usc.edu

Beginning in 2008, Los Angeles embarked on a 30-year plan to reinvent public transportation within the region by
doubling the number of stations and miles of track in the public transit rail system. This nascent system, currently
composed of light and heavy-rail lines radiating from a downtown node, is planned to serve the entire region by
the end of those three decades. The Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority (LA Metro)
recognizes three main phases in the design and implementation of new lines and stations: Planning, Design, and
Construction. LA Metro takes responsibility for planning and construction, but design falls to the city that the
station and line pass through. This is the GAP, a lack of design oversight by Metro at the crucial middle section of
the project, where urban design visioning and decision fall to many different entities at the municipal level. This
presentation problematizes the different approaches and strategies layered into this process by examining the
Leimert Park neighborhood, a historic Olmsted-designed community that successfully advocated for a rail-transit
stop in their neighborhood. Using extensive survey, interview, and morphological data, this presentation will
present one example of current urban design strategies and successes and failures in a contemporary metropolis
engaged in a new iteration of infrastructure investment, an iteration that many city are dealing with. The GAP
creates a unique window for exploring and evaluating a range of responses across a shared landscape of
investment.
References
 Berney, R. et al (2012). Wilshire Transit Corridor Public Life Survey. Los Angeles: USC School of
Architecture.
 Berney, R. (2015). An Analysis of the LA Metro Urban Design Tool Kit. Los Angeles: USC School of
Architecture (white paper, in process).
 Cervero, R. (1998). The Transit Metropolis: A Global Inquiry. WDC: Island Press.
 Ewing, R. & K. Bartholomew (2013). Pedestrian and Transit-Oriented Design. WDC: ULI & APA.
 Gottleib, R. (2007). Reinventing Los Angeles. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Abstract Index #: 892
ACTIVE CENTERS - INTERACTIVE EDGES: ACTIVE FRONTAGES AS THE ARCHITECTURE OF PUBLIC LIFE
Abstract System ID#: 1385
Individual Paper
KICKERT, Conrad [University of Cincinnati] conrad.kickert@uc.edu
This paper delves into the forces and patterns behind the transforming relationship between architecture and
public space in Western urban cores over the past century. After defining a methodology for structurally
measuring the interactivity of frontages over time, the study focuses on the cores of two case study city:
Detroit, Michigan and The Hague, Netherlands. The two seemingly disparate city are demonstrated to have
undergone remarkably similar patterns of frontage interactivity erosion, with outcomes diverging as a result of an
often reinforcing set of forces. Through a combination of narrative historiography, detailed mapping and
statistical studies a set of recommendations is generated to help urban designers and planners better understand
frontage decline and counter it. Only upon understanding frontages as social, economic, cultural, political and
technological constructs with physical, functional and connotative effects on public space will the profession be
able to define the future of the architecture of public life.
References
 Gehl, J. (2006) Close encounters with buildings. Urban Design International, 11: 29-47.
 Madanipour, A. (2003) Public and private spaces of the city. London; New York: Routledge.
 Moudon, A.V. (1986) Built for change: neighborhood architecture in San Francisco. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
 Thomas, J.M. (1997) Redevelopment and race: planning a finer city in postwar Detroit. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press.

Abstract Index #: 893
BLUE OVER RUST. THE DESIGN OF ALTERNATIVE WATER INFRASTRUCTURES IN THE LEGACY city.
Abstract System ID#: 1269
Individual Paper
ARQUERO DE ALARCON, Maria [University of Michigan] marquero@umich.edu
Located in the most densely urbanized sub-basin in the Great Lakes system, the city of Cleveland and Detroit
are paradigmatic cases of Rust Belt Urbanism. Reporting a sustained population loss since the 1960s, these urban
landscapes currently display an excess of vacant land, unevenly interspersed between residential neighborhood
and outdated industrial and commercial corridors. Over time, the population contraction translated into a
shrinking tax base, and maintaining the obsolete infrastructural system built to serve a much larger constituency
has become more challenging. The case of water and sewage infrastructure illustrates this legacy. In the two
cities under consideration, the infrastructure system go far beyond the municipal boundary to serve an evergrowing suburban population. During high-precipitation events, the combined sewers are already full when they
reach the city boundaries, causing the system’s failure, and releasing untreated water into the urban rivers.
Led by the environment Protection Agency’s mandate to reduce water pollution, the two city are adopting
green over grey infrastructure approaches to reduce storm water runoff entering in the combined sewer system
(Olin and Project Clean Lake, 2012). These initiatives offer an opportunity to repurpose vacant land as green and
blue infrastructure, improving water quality through better management of storm water flows (Desimini, 2014).
Advancing this agenda, new collaborative frameworks are emerging in these city, offering an alternative to
traditional infrastructure governance. The scope, extent and ambition of the current initiatives vary in each city,
opening up many questions regarding scale, continuity, implementation and maintenance of the projects.
Ranging from strategies at the metropolitan scale, to tactics that reclaim a vacant residential lot at a time, the
effort to reintroduce performance-biased landscapes is building a new land stewardship agenda that represents a
fertile ground for design innovation. Still in the very early stages of development, much of the work under
development is more concerned with setting performative standards for these landscapes than giving legibility to
the cultural aspects of these infrastructural landscapes.
Using a comparative case study approach among these city, this investigation outlines the different initiatives
advancing the reuse of vacant land as blue infrastructure, and examines the partnerships between municipal
governments, land banks, water utilities, philanthropies and other local non-profits involved. Adding to this large
matrix of actors, the complex financial structures required to move the projects forward spark novel partnerships
that challenge old models of single expertise and mono-functionality. The hybrid nature of these landscapes, as
environmental and civic infrastructure, also participates in contemporary debates looking at decentralized and
multifunctional infrastructures (Green and Blue Infrastructure, Detroit Future City Framework, 2013) as an
emerging paradigm for long-term declining North-American legacy city.
This paper discusses three main issues:
1) the ongoing green and blue infrastructure initiatives in Detroit and Cleveland, as relevant cases of study
in the post-industrial legacy of the Rust Belt city.
2) the current institutional landscape enabling the strategies of urban re-naturalization, and the agents
involved in the implementation and maintenance; and
3) the resulting infrastructural landscapes, their social acceptance and contribution to a new urban
identity.
References
 Green over Grey, 2013. OLIN for LAND studio in collaboration with Northeast Ohio Regional Sewer
District, The Cleveland Foundation and Neighborhood Progress Inc.
 Desimini, J. (2013) From Planned Shrinkage to Formerly Urban: Staking Landscape the Shrinking City
Debate. Landscape Journal: design, planning, and management of the land, Volume 33, Number 1, 2014,
pp. 17-35






Northeast Ohio Regional Sewer District. Green Infrastructure Plan, Project Clean Lake, available at:
http://www.neorsd.org/I_Library.php?a=download_file&LIBRARY_RECORD_ID=5526
Green Infrastructure Program Progress Report, Detroit Sewage and Water Department, August, 2013.
Available at:
http://www.dwsd.org/downloads_n/about_dwsd/npdes/dwsd_green_infrastructure_progress_report_
2013-08-01.pdf
Detroit Future City: Detroit Strategic Framework Plan, December 2012. [Detroit, Mich.: s.n.], 2012.
Available at: http://detroitworksproject.com/the-framework/

Abstract Index #: 894
VERNACULAR LANDSCAPES: A SUSTAINABLE SOLUTION TO CHANGE?
Abstract System ID#: 1272
Individual Paper
CHIFOS, Carla [University of Cincinnati] carla.chifos@uc.edu
Outside the city of Greece, and particularly on the islands, both the remnants of and the lingering use of
traditional landscape management that has evolved over 4000 years, still shapes the identity and livelihoods of
many people. But these landscapes and the knowledge that has been handed down have been under threat for
more than 30 years. Modernization, reliance on a tourism economy, and shifting regional land management and
governance schemes have disregarded and conflicted with the traditional landscape. Evidence shows that the
traditional practices were more in harmony with nature and social equity, and the shifts to modern ways have
exacerbated environment problems, negatively impacted quality of life, and have marginalized portions of the
population. My case study focuses on the landscapes of Santorini and Crete, where I have been observing,
documenting and analyzing the traditional landscapes for over ten years. This paper documents the sustainability
characteristics of the key traditional landscapes management practices on Santorini and in the Langada Valley of
Crete; explores the connections of this landscape with the people that still rely on it; analyzes the political
economy of the threat to this landscape; and offers insights for a more sustainable transition.
References
 Vos, W and H. Meekes (1999) "Trends in European cultural landscape development: Perspectives for a
sustainable future" Landscape and urban_planning. Vol 46, 1-3, pp 3-14.
 Vileniske, Indre (2008) "Influence of built Heritage of Sustainable Development of Landscape"
Landscape Research, Vol 33, 4.
 Dieterich, Martin and Straaten, Jan van der (2004) "Cultural landscapes and  land_use: the nature
conservation-society interface. Dordrect: Kluwer Academic
 Heckler, Serena (2009) Landscape, process and power: a re-evaluating traditional environment
knowledge. New York: Berghahn Books.
 Hibbard, Michael, Lane, Marcus, and Kathllen Rasmussen (2008) "The Split personality of planning"
Journal of Planning Literature. Vol 23, 2, pp 136-151.

Abstract Index #: 895
EVOLUTION OF PRE-MODERN URBAN SPATIAL FORM: A CASE STUDY OF THE SHANGHAI FRENCH CONCESSION
DURING 1849-1943
Abstract System ID#: 1293
Individual Paper
GANG, Liu [Tongji University, Shanghai] liugang_tj@126.com
Pre-modern China left behind a rich legacy of urban space, but the existing transformation models of old city
ignore and even destroy its urban dynamic and diversity. Pre-modern urban space systematically reflects a
variety of modern urban spatial types and their integrated evolution model with specific Chinese characteristics,

and therefore the relevant studies provide references to current planning and design of historic neighborhood
redevelopment. Based on complex system theory and the methodology of urban morphology, this paper will
analyze multi-phase and multi-scale space evolution of pre-modern urban spatial form.
The paper will 1) build a theoretical model for pre-modern urban spatial form evolution and propose an analytical
framework of spatial form evolution at different phases and scales, 2) conduct an empirical study of pre-modern
Shanghai French Concession based on the GIS database of pre-modern Shanghai historic neighborhood
established by the applicant. A typology of spatial form at three scales, including parcel, neighborhood and urban
area will be identified, as well as their multiple features. The interaction among space of different scale at
different phase will be explored through cluster analysis, and then the model of spatial form evolution will be
built; 3) investigate a joint mechanism with planning and design of historic neighborhood’ redevelopment. The
spatial forms worth of reserving will be identified and the standard of choosing regeneration parcels will be
established. It is followed by an exploration of multiple possibilities to restructure historic urban space.
References
 Hisashi Ohtsuki, Christoph Hauert, Erez Lieberman & Martin A. Nowak, 2006, A simple rule for the
evolution of cooperation on graphs and social networks [J], Nature, Vol 441, 25 May.
 Andrew M. Colman, 2006, The puzzle of cooperation [J], NATURE, Vol 440, 6, April.P744.
 Ph，Panerai, J，Castex, J-Ch，Depaule, et al， Urban Forms: The Death and Life of the Urban Block[M],
Routledge， 2004
 G, G, Cataldi L Maffei, P, Vaccaro, Saverio Muratori and the Italian school of planning typology[J], Urban
Morphology, 2002(06)
 Yoshiharu Tsukamoto, Junzo Kuroda, Made in Tokyo[M], Kajima Institute Publishing Co, 2001

Abstract Index #: 896
THE NEW ORLEANS DESIGN MOMENT REVISITED
Abstract System ID#: 1317
Individual Paper
WAGNER, Jacob [University of Missouri-Kansas City] wagnerjaco@umkc.edu
Following Hurricane Katrina, the city of New Orleans became a “testing ground” for various planning and policy
agendas: public school reform, the demolition and re-design of public housing, environment planning in the
context of global climate change, and various schemes to “rethink” multiple components of the city’s urban
design framework - from “flood proof” housing designs to the New Urbanist initiative to demolish the inner-city
highway through Treme. Wagner and Frisch (2009) defined this “design moment” process as a critical juncture in
the city’s history.
In this paper, the author revisits the concept of the “design moment” in New Orleans and its repercussions for
planning and urban design beyond New Orleans. Based on applied planning research in Kansas City and reflection
on the New Orleans experience, the paper addresses the underlying political coalitions that organize around
specific efforts to reframe and transform the social space of the city. The myriad concepts - big and small - to
redesign the city are contrasted with the actual recovery process on the ground and what projects were
completed.
Following this section of the paper, a second part examines the influence of the New Orleans design moment
experience on other city. Using a case study of the Make It Right Foundation’s work in one Kansas City
neighborhood, the paper reflects on the process of planners and designers who worked in New Orleans following
the disaster and how they have applied that experience to other places. In particular - this section addresses the
question - how did the New Orleans design moment influence planning beyond New Orleans?

References
 Wagner, J. and M. Frisch, 2009. Introduction: New Orleans and the Design Moment. Journal of Urban
Design. 14(3): 237-255.
 Nelson, M., Ehrenfeucht, R., and Laska, S. 2007. “Planning, plans, and people: professional expertise,
local knowledge, and governmental action in post-Hurricane Katrina New Orleans,” Cityscape: A Journal
of Policy Development and Research, 9(3), pp. 23–54.
 Wagner, J. Digital Media and the Politics of Disaster Recovery in New Orleans, in Sandercock and Attili
(Eds.) Multimedia Explorations in Urban Policy and Planning: Beyond the Flatlands (pp. 105-128)
 Cuthbert, Urban design: requiem for an era – a review and critique of the last 50 years, Urban Design
International (2007)
 Sandercock, L. Towards a Planning Imagination for the 21st Century. Journal of the American Planning
Association (JAPA) 70(2) 2004: 133-141.

Abstract Index #: 897
RESILIENCE, PLACEMAKING, ART AND INNER CITY neighborhood: A CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK FOR
RESILIENCE
Abstract System ID#: 1327
Poster
KIM, Joongsub [Lawrence Technological University] jkim@ltu.edu
Resilience has been frequently debated in recent years in the fields of architecture, urban design, planning, and
other related disciplines. Detroit is among many city that are mentioned as city of resilience by a growing
number of scholars, policymakers, practitioners, and community groups. Among many facets of resilience, this
study focuses on a potential link between placemaking-based art and resilience in low income urban
communities. Studies suggest that some art and gardens have therapeutic and healing effects on patients.
Empirical research on the impact of placemaking-based art on resilience, however, is scant. This is an important
area of research, especially for postindustrial city like Detroit, which need a resilient “bounce-back” from
shrinkage , in the setting of growing attention to power of art and placemaking.
This pilot study uses an in-depth literature review and case studies to support the arguments that art can play an
important role in placemaking, and that placemaking-based artwork can in turn build resilience, especially in the
context of disadvantaged urban area.
This study also uses the results of interviews, survey questionnaires, and field observations in Detroit’s
underserved area to verify lessons learned from the literature review, and examine whether or not there is any
positive relationship or correlation between art and placemaking, and also between placemaking-conducive art
activities and resilient behaviors.
The preliminary study results suggest that while placemaking art is likely to foster resilience, the locations, types
of art, and operationalization of resilience could influence research outcomes. Nevertheless, this pilot study, by
proposing a conceptual framework, is an important first step toward a more robust model. It will also help
develop more rigorous research agendas for resilience, which is arguably one of the most important topics in the
post-industrial era.
References
 Bennett, J. (2014). Creative placemaking in community planning and development: An introduction to
ArtPlace America. Community Development Investment Review, 10(2), 74-81.
 Brown, J., Dixon, D. & Gillham, O. (2013). Urban design for an urban century: Shaping more livable,
equitable and resilient city (2nd ed.). New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Clift, S. (2012). Creative arts as a public health resource: Moving from practice-based research to
evidence-based practice. Perspectives in Public Health, 132(3), 120-127.




Norris, F. H., Tracy, M., & Galea, S. (2009). Looking for resilience: Understanding the longitudinal
trajectories of responses to stress. Social science & medicine, 68(12), 2190-2198.
Tugade, M. M., & Fredrickson, B. L. (2004). Resilient individuals use positive emotions to bounce back
from negative emotional experiences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86, 320–333.

Abstract Index #: 898
WHAT TIME IS THIS PLACE NOW?
Abstract System ID#: 1362
Individual Paper
LAURIAN, Lucie [University of Iowa] lucie-laurian@uiowa.edu
This paper revisits Kevin Lynch’s What time is this place? 1972 book to shed light on increasing social needs for
stronger groundings in time (in addition to place) and to support planning efforts hindered by change-adverse
environments. Lynch’s book is a reflection on the image of time in the city – essential to human wellbeing and
effective action- and on public institutions and planners’ roles in the management of images of time as an
intrinsic element of the urban environment (planning interventions can visibly connect past and future, support
public perceptions of change, provide options for how individuals experience time etc.).
My discussion starts with a theoretical overview of time in the modern era. I ground my work on Kant’s
philosophical reflections on time as a precondition for all phenomena and Hegel views on the importance of
historical records to situate the present. I then focus on the modern era, with Taylor’s use of time for productivity
maximization and Lewis Mumford’s reflection on the clock as “the key machine of the modern industrial age”
marking a modern form of servitude for workers.
Transitioning to the current era, I discuss Jay Grifffith’s work on time as a high stakes political notion– highlighting
in this context the radical act of William’s Faulkner’s destruction of a watch. Next, I discuss the social impact of
our relation to time in the context of three distinct phenomena. First, time, not perceived but counted by clocks
and schedules, is omnipresent and unavoidable in the urban landscape and on our bodies (watches, cell phones
etc). Second, with the advent of information technologies, historical times are becoming as abridged as space is
becoming reduced (Marshall Mc Luhan). Third, urban change in US city is often so total that we don’t remember
or keep track of what preexisted change. E.g., while the Rurh region of Germany is preserving its industrial ruins
as heritage, Detroit would rather be rid of decrepit industrial structures and move on to a new prosperous era,
presumably supported by a service /creative economy.
To support a healthier and more liberating relationship to time, Lynch proposed planning interventions, such as
the construction of future prototypes, time enclaves, resource conservation and preservation (land, buildings,
materials, cultural capital, memory). He discussed ways to manage the image of time and urban change that
remain highly innovative today. I review these recommendations and propose others in light of postmodern
changes.
References
 Kevin Lynch, 1972. What time is this place. MIT Press

Abstract Index #: 899
CHANGING URBAN ENVIRONMENTS: CREATING AND MAINTAINING RESILIENT AND REGENERATIVE URBAN
PLACES
Abstract System ID#: 1366
Individual Paper
NDUBISI, Forster [Texas A&M University] fndubisi@arch.tamu.edu

Population growth is increasing rapidly, worldwide. The world is becoming more urban as well. Increased
population growth in metropolitan area has intensified burdens on landscapes to accommodate our daily needs
for food, work, shelter, and recreation. Rapid urbanization influences ecological conditions by altering the
physical mosaic of the landscape. One noticeable effect, landscape fragmentation (the division of large parcels
of land into smaller lots), separates, degrades, and homogenizes habitats; in turn, affecting biogeochemical
cycling and resulting in the erosion of biodiversity. Sprawl and climate change (severe and unpredictable
weather events) exacerbates the negative ecological effects of urban development.
Despite an impressive array of urban spatial forms and structures, the complexity of these problems associated
with rapid urbanization and climate change has made solutions increasingly difficult to attain. I offer a
complementary spatial framework comprised of a set of principles to facilitate meaning dialogue in addressing
these problems. At the core of these principles is the search for a pathway aimed at creating and maintaining
adaptive and regenerative urban places. I explore supportive principles for creating such places. The principles
include the design imperatives for change and uncertainty grounded on ecological science especially resiliency
theory; conservation of ecosystem services; purposeful adaptation and mitigation of climate change  impact;
adoption of regenerative practices, and commitment to place. I examine how the spatial framework compares
with similar ones such as new urbanism, ecological urbanism, and landscape urbanism. I I conclude by affirming
that the effectiveness of these principles in managing growth in urban landscapes lies in their synergistic effects.
References
 Wu, Jiango and Tong Wu, "Ecological Resilience as a Foundation for Urban Design and Sustainability."
Resiliency in Ecology and Urban Design: Linking Theory to Practice for Sustainable city, edited by S.
Pickett, M. Cadenasso, and B. McTrath, 221 (New York: Springer, 2013).
 Ndubisi, Forster eds., The Ecological Design and Planning Reader (Washington, DC: Island Press, 2014).
 Steiner, Frederick, "Landscape Ecological Urbanism: Origins and Trajectories." Landscape and Urban
Planning 100, no. 4 (2011): 333-337.
 Spirn, Ann Whiston, "Ecological Urbanism: A Framework for the Design of Resilient city." Working
Paper. Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2013.

Abstract Index #: 902
MAKING LIVABLE AND HEALTHY comminuty: PERSPECTIVES FROM ACADEMIA
Abstract System ID#: 6
Roundtable or Informal Discussion Session
WAGNER, Fritz [University of Washington] fwagner@uw.edu
BIRCH, Eugenie [University of Pennsylvania] elbirch@design.upenn.edu
BOYLE, Robin [Wayne State University] r.boyle@wayne.edu
BRIGHT, Elise [Texas A&M University] ebright@arch.tamu.edu
PERRY, David [University of Illinois at Chicago] dperry@uic.edu
This roundtable will present perspectives from across the US on (approaches to or dimensions of) creating livable,
healthy and sustainable comminuty. The development of such comminuty is becoming an important part of
community development, urban design, policy planning, public health and urban affairs. With the desire by urban
scholars throughout N. America and Europe to move from comminuty that are often described as sterile,
unhealthy and boring places to live, it is important to understand the factors that make comminuty livable. This
roundtable will discuss what has gone wrong in many majority and minority comminuty, and will offer
suggestions and model program for making them more healthy and livable.
References
 Making Healthy Places. Dannenberg, etal. Island Press. 2011
 Comprehensive Planning for Public Health: Results of the Planning and Community Health Research
Center Survey



From Fitness Zones to the Medical Mile: How Urban Parks Can Best Promote Health and Wellness. Trust
for Public Lands 2011, Washington, DC

Abstract Index #: 903
THE SPATIALITY AND SCALE OF INCOME MIXING IN NEW SUSTAINABLE neighborhood: EVIDENCE FROM
LEED-ND comminuty
Abstract System ID#: 26
Individual Paper
SZIBBO, Nicola [University of California Berkeley] nszibbo@berkeley.edu
The question of how affordable housing is internally ‘mixed’ within a neighborhood, and its complexities
associated with design-development and implementation has been well documented in the literature (Fraser et
al 2013; Graves 2011; Roberts 2007; Schwartz & Tajbakhsh 1997). Lucy (1994) aptly notes that “issues in the
virtues in the spatial mixing of differences, and in fostering similarities among people are continually in tension.”
The exact method and way in which mixing occurs (either at the scale of the building itself, the neighborhood
scale or the scale of the region) varies widely depending on the particular context and type of affordable housing
development scheme. However, little discussion has taken place regarding the design and spatiality of income
mixing within a neighborhood.
Should residents of different income groups be mixed vertically in a building, or distributed horizontally in
different buildings across a development? Should there be regulation or incentives to ensure that affordable
housing is not only incorporated, but also well distributed in new sustainable neighborhood, in order to ensure
that social sustainability and social equity principles are being upheld? Given that affordable housing is optional
in LEED-ND (Leadership in Energy and environment Design for Neighborhood Development), the possibility
remains that affordable housing is either dismissed or treated in a segregated fashion. This paper will present
survey and interview evidence from LEED-ND Accredited Professionals and policy analysis evidence from two
LEED-ND platinum neighborhood in Vancouver, British Columbia and Portland, Oregon to illustrate the various
tensions that arise in the creation of mixed income neighborhood. All of the case studies have incorporated
income mixing schemes and have spatially mixed affordable housing in different ways. The paper will illuminate
strategies for ‘what works’ and ‘what doesn’t’ with respect to affordable housing policy and design for planners,
architects, consultants and developers in North America.
References
 Fraser, James Curtis, Ashley Brown Burns, Joshua Theodore Bazuin, and Deirdre Áine Oakley. 2013.
HOPE VI, Colonization, and the Production of Difference. Urban Affairs Review 49(4): 525–556.
 Graves, Erin M. 2011. Mixed Outcome Developments. Journal of the American Planning Association
77(2): 143–153.
 Roberts, Marion. 2007. Sharing Space: Urban Design and Social Mixing in Mixed Income New
Communities. Planning Theory & Practice 8(2): 183–204.
 Schwartz, Alex, and Kian Tajbakhsh. 1997. Mixed-Income Housing: Unanswered Questions. Cityscape
3(2): 71–92.
 Lucy, William H. 1994. If Planning Includes Too Much, Maybe It Should Include More. Journal of the
American Planning Association 60(3): 305–318.

Author Index
Abramson, Daniel: 363, 365,
394
Acey, Charisma: 398
Adarkwa, Frank: 351
Adiv, Naomi: 626
Adkins, Arlie: 269, 789
Afzalan, Nader: 5
Agarwal, Ajay: 231
Aghili, Ramina: 879
Agrawal, Asha: 756
Agrawal, Sandeep: 162
Agyeman, Julian: 129
Ai, Ning: 109, 118
Airgood-Obrycki, Whitney: 200,
326
Akar, Gulsah: 748, 766
Akcakaya, Imge: 250
Al Ali, Anfal: 869
Al, Stefan: 882
Alakshendra, Abhinav: 261
Alam, Bhuiyan: 717
Alawadi, Khaled: 192, 855
Alegria, Tito: 362
Alemi, Farzad: 302
Alfonzo, Mariela: 512
Ali, Rubaba: 689
Ali, Amal K: 444
Allahyar, Arianna: 692
Alterman, Rachelle: 439
Alvarado, Rigoberto Edgardo:
674
Amborski, David: 447
Anacker, Katrin: 168, 470
Andavarapu, Deepika: 343
Anderson, Tiffany: 88
Andreason, Stuart: 676
Andrews, Clinton: 97
Anjomani, Ardeshir: 340
Anthony, Jerry: 316
Appleyard, Bruce: 574, 769
Arafat, Abdulnaser: 223
Arata, Heather: 418
Arellano, Vicente: 832
Arlikatti, Sudha: 359
Arquero de Alarcon, Maria: 893
Asomani-Boateng, Raymond:
351
Attard, Nathan: 803
Audirac, Ivonne: 338

Auffrey, Christopher: 866
Ay, Deniz: 357
Bae, Christine: 124, 159
Bae, Kyungwan: 83, 142
Baek, So Ra: 478, 484
Baek, Solhyon: 478, 484
Bahl, Deepak: 871
Bahman Teymouri, Elham: 628
Baker, Dwayne: 217
Balakrishnan, Sai: 452
Baldwin, Robert: 127
Bame, Sherry: 277
Banai, Reza: 860
Banerjee, Tridib: 643, 871
Barajas, Jesus: 756
Barbour, Elisa: 672
Barlas, Adnan: 861
Barry, Janice: 586
Bartholomew, Keith: 657
Basolo, Victoria: 332
Bassett, Shannon: 856
Bates, Lisa: 417
Baum, Howell: 596, 602
Beatley, Tim: 787
Beauregard, Robert: 588
Beggs, Wayne: 595
Beheshtian, Arash: 790
Bejleri, Ilir: 501, 820, 845
Bellamy, Roberta: 247
Ben-elia, Eran: 841
BenDor, Todd: 85
Benenson, Itzhak: 841
Bengle, Tara: 221
Berke, Philip: 423, 457
Berliner, Rosaria: 302
Berney, Rachel: 891
Bhatt, Jigar: 598
Bhattacharya, Torsha: 806
Bierbaum, Ariel: 251
Bieri, David: 46
Bierling, David: 123, 504
Birch, Eugenie: 71, 238, 902
Birch, Traci : 111
Black, Tristan: 233
Blacker, Brian: 66
Blankers, Sydney: 109
Bleibleh, Sahera: 876
Blumenberg, Evelyn: 801, 805,
815
Boarnet, Marlon: 304, 775, 778
Bockmeyer, Janice: 274
Bond, Megan: 686

Bonnell, Levi: 481
Born, Branden: 631
Bornstein, Lisa: 535
Bostic, Raphael W.: 304
Boston, Thomas: 670
Boswell, Jacob: 576
Boswell, Michael: 158
Botchwey, Nisha: 515
Bou Akar, Hiba: 374
Boyer, Robert: 597
Boyle, Robin: 655, 902
Brand, Anna Livia: 111
Braza, Mark: 132
Bright, Elise: 902
Brinkley, Catherine: 77, 257,
487
Brito, Mozar: 644
Broaddus, Andrea: 811
Brody, Jason: 851
Brody, Samuel: 75, 411
Brooks, Kerry: 901
Brown Wilson, Barbara: 446
Brown, Anne: 681, 805, 815
Brown, Jeffrey: 686, 695, 783
Buckman, Stephen: 156, 233
Budge, Juliette: 179
Buehler, Ralph: 722
Bumbach, Michael: 501
Burayidi, Michael: 194
Burga, Hector Fernando: 186
Butcher, Mary: 781
Butler, William: 92, 561
Byahut, Sweta: 364
Cai, Yanjun: 150
Caldwell, Amelia: 220
Campbell, Heather: 594
Campbell, Kayleigh: 685, 711
Campbell, Scott: 95
Cao, Jason: 270, 707
Capanema-Alvares, Lucia: 428
Carlton, Ian: 751
Carolini, Gabriella: 409
Casey, Colleen: 569
Castillo, Pedro Hansel: 321
Catala, Argenis: 321
Caudy, Michael: 198
Cervero, Robert: 390
Chakrabarti, Sandip: 791
Chakraborty, Arnab: 300
Chakravarty, Surajit: 643
Chalana, Manish: 395
Chan, Felicity Hwee-Hwa: 643

Chan, Shihliang: 7
Chandrasekhar, Divya: 102,
232, 482
Chapin, Tim: 759, 764
Chapple, Karen: 242, 323
Charles, Suzanne Lanyi: 523
Chatman, Daniel: 283, 390, 440
Chen, Xueying : 768
Chen, Na: 7, 766
Chen, Peng: 708
Chen, Shaowei: 355
Chen, Xueming: 824
Chen, Yan: 11, 81
Chen, YuJen: 748
Cheng, Chingwen: 70
Cheng, Shang: 182
Cheng, Wen: 702
Cheong, Caroline: 403
Cheramie, Kristi: 576
Chifos, Carla: 536, 894
Chin, Jae Teuk: 443
Chin, John: 28
Chinchilla, Melissa: 215
Cho, Jaewoo: 125
Cho, John: 843
Choi, Chang Gyu: 875
Choi, Kwangyul: 737, 738
Choi, Myungshik: 292
Choi, Simon: 702, 843
Choi, Yumi: 308
Chrisinger, Benjamin: 464, 487
Christensen, Rachel: 561
Chun, Bumseok: 6
Circella, Giovanni: 302
Clark, Jennifer: 661
Clark, Jill: 466, 498
Clifton, Kelly: 706, 798
Cloutier, Scott: 883
Coffman, Makena: 788
Cohen, James: 128
Collins, Brady: 166
Collins, Patricia: 231
Combs, Tabitha: 795
Connolly, James: 141
Conroy, Maria: 107
Contreras, Santina: 347
Cook, Michael: 850
Cooper, John: 446, 457
Cooper-McCann, Patrick: 205,
239
Cowell, Margaret: 48, 315
Cowley, Jennifer: 1
Crane, Randall: 416
Crane, Rebecca: 380

Credit, Kevin: 30
Crewe, Katherine: 873
Crute, Jeremy: 759, 764
Cuadra, Judith: 368
Currie, Melissa: 221
Daniels, Thomas: 63
Danielsen, Karen: 558
Daniere, Amrita: 401
Dann, Ryan: 269
Das, Ashok: 381
Das, Kirti: 180
David, Nina: 156
Davis, Carla: 468
Davis, Diane: 620
Davy, Benjamin: 599
Day Farnsworth, Lindsey: 488
Day, Kristen: 492, 512
De la Llata, Silvano: 632
De la Ossa, Melisa: 61
Deakin, Elizabeth: 840
Deal, Brian: 17, 20, 94
Debats, Jessica: 67
Dedekorkut, Aysin: 69
del Rio, Vicente: 854, 863
Delmelle, Elizabeth: 221
Deng, Dong: 437
Deng, Guoying: 266
Deng, Lan: 218, 270
Deng, Yujun: 146
Dewar, Margaret: 205
Diao, Chunyuan: 498
Diao, Mi: 694
Dill, Jennifer: 705, 789
Dilling, Janet: 368
Dillon, Harya: 778
DiPetrillo, Stephanie: 867
Doan, Petra: 167, 168, 169
Donegan, Mary: 49
Dong, Hongwei: 697
Dooling, Sarah: 152
Doussard, Marc: 648
Douthat, Thomas: 352
Dozier, Deshonay: 573
Drucker, Joshua: 900
Drummond, William: 15
Duan, Leilei: 8
Duarte, Fabio: 763
Duncan, Allison: 837
Duncan, Michael: 758, 759
Dunning, Anne: 392, 730
Dunning, Kelly Heber: 138
Dyckman, Caitlin: 122, 127
Eberhard, Rachel: 104
Eckerd, Adam: 48

Edwards, Mary: 472
Ehrenfeucht, Renia: 562, 884
El-Geneidy, Ahmed: 709
Eldridge, James: 429
Ellen, Ingrid: 210, 211, 259
Elliott, Meagan: 205
Elliott, Michael: 352
Emlinger, Ana: 677
Engle, Jayne: 402
Eom, Hyeun Tae: 427
Erdogan, Sevgi: 733
Esechie, Jovita: 458
Estevez, Luis: 454
Estiri, Hossein: 243
Estwick, Noel M.: 458
Ewing, Reid: 201, 436, 442, 483,
657, 713, 761
Falletta, Liz: 885
Fan, Yingling: 180
Fang, Kevin: 774, 794
Fang, Li: 26
Farhat, Ramzi : 851
Farzinmoghadam, Mohamad:
21
Fawaz, Mona: 366
Feiock, Richard: 559
Felkner, John: 346
Feng, Lisi: 188
Ferreira, Joseph: 280
Ferrell, Christopher: 769
Finn, Donovan: 102, 232, 482
Fischer, Lauren: 771
Fischler, Raphael: 538
Fishman, Robert: 852
Fitzgerald, Joan: 117
Fleming, William: 121
Flores, Nina: 175
Fogg, Louis: 310
Foote, Nathan: 252
Forbes, Allison: 665
Forester, John: 602, 642
Forjuoh, Samuel: 508
Forsyth, Ann: 460
Foss, Ann: 114
Foster, Nicole: 614
Frank, Kathryn: 611
Freedgood, Julia: 466
Freitas, Antoinette: 580
French, Simone: 180
French, Steven: 19
Frescoln, Kirstin: 281, 289
Freyer, Allan: 51
Fricano, Russell: 468
Frieden, Lex: 307

Friedman, Kathryn: 131
Friedmann, John: 365, 602
Friendly, Abigail: 367
Frisch, Michael: 168, 881
Fu, Xin: 13
FUJII, Yasuyuki: 197
Fulton, Lewis: 302
Gabbe, Charles: 416, 440
Gaber, John: 195
Gabre, Teshome: 410
Galster, George: 222, 336
Gamal, Ahmad: 383
Gamble, Julie: 373
Gamez, Jose: 221
Ganapati, Nazife: 514
Ganapati, Sukumar: 409
Gang, Liu: 895
Ganning, Joanna: 207, 255
Gao, Jingkang: 804
Garcia Zambrana, Ivis: 312
Garfinkel-Castro, Andrea: 532
Garikapati, Venu: 236
Ge, Yue: 445
Gebhardt, Matthew: 633
Gehrke, Steven: 734, 798
Geislar, Sally: 87
Genskow, Kenneth: 143
George, Linda: 152
Geyzersky , Dmitry: 841
Ghahramani, Arash: 879
Ghimire, Jiwnath: 384
Ghorbani, Pooya: 35
Ghosh, Sudeshna: 42
Gibson, Huston: 69
Gibson, Karen: 777
Gilderbloom, John: 846
Gladstone, David: 57
Glasmeier, Amy: 215
Gnanasekaran, Shanmuga
Priya: 120
Gocmen, Asli: 135
Goddard, Tara: 705
Goh, Kian: 168, 584
Goldberg-Miller, Shoshanah: 27
Goldman, Emily: 9, 770
Golub, Aaron: 330, 390, 662,
819
Gomaa, Mohammed: 136, 137
Gonick, Sophie: 372
Gonzalez, Erualdo: 320
Good, Ryan: 278, 602
Goodspeed, Robert: 603
Gorska, Karolina: 199
Gough, Meghan: 446, 625

Graham, Alexandra: 459
Graham, Leigh: 417
Grant, Jill: 537
Green, Timothy: 45, 47
Greenblatt, Jeffery: 158
Greene, Cole: 784, 793
Greenlee, Andrew: 285, 339
Gregory, Will: 537
Grengs, Joe: 825
Griffin, Greg: 696
Grover, Himanshu: 411
Grunninger Bonney, Courtney:
577
Gu, Donghwan: 779
Guerra, Erick: 712, 724
Guhathakurta, Subhrajit: 160,
515, 796
Guinand, Sandra: 887
Guldmann, Jean-Michel: 6, 715
Guo, Tongtong: 124
Guo, Zhan: 512, 797
Gurran, Nicole: 303
Gurstein, Penny: 329
Ha, Gyoungjun: 79
Ha, Hui Jeong: 170
Habans, Robert: 52, 55
Habeeb, Dana: 516
Hack, Gary: 882
Haddad, Monica: 400
Hadden-Loh, Tracy: 585
Haila, Anne: 365
Haines, Anna: 113
Hajrasouliha, Amir: 225
Hakim, Nahal: 820
Hamidi, Shima: 201, 442, 483,
761
Hammel, Joy: 305
Han, Albert: 413
Handy, Susan: 302
Hankey, Steve: 720
Hanley, Lisa: 356
Hanlon, Bernadette: 200, 308
Hansen, Lauren: 376
Harman, Jeffery: 501
Harper-Anderson, Elsie: 663
Harris, John: 369
Hartley, Daniel: 38
Hartt, Maxwell: 60
Harwood, Stacy: 171
Hatuka, Tali: 616
Hawkins, Christopher: 559
He, Sylvia: 404, 839
Heckert, Megan: 112
Heiman, Kelly: 139

Herbert, Berneece: 476
Heris, Mehdi: 872
Herranz, Joaquin: 268
Hess, Daniel: 540, 746
Hibbard, Michael: 611
Hickman, Hannah: 610
Highfield, Wesley: 75
Hillier, Amy: 477
Hilton, Holly: 140
Hirt, Sonia: 414
Hoch, Charles: 18, 604
Hodgson, Kimberley: 498
Hoey, Lesli: 396, 521
Homsy, George: 660
Hong, ChangYu: 76, 348
Hong, Jinhyun: 690
Hooper, Michael: 399
Hopkins, Lewis: 597
Hoque, Simi: 21
Horn, Keren: 259
Horner, Mark: 758
Horney, Jennifer: 457
Horst, Megan: 487
Hostovsky, Charles: 98
Hou, Yuting: 726
Houston, Douglas: 775
Hovey, Bradshaw: 553
Howarth, Thomas: 221
Howell, Kathryn: 260
Howlett, Marc: 828
Hsu, David: 24, 73, 80, 724
Hu, Hong: 73, 80
Hu, Hsi-Hwa: 702
Hu, Lingqian: 829
Hu, Wanyang: 266
Huang, Guoping: 833
Huang, Hao: 33
Huang, Shih Kai: 868
Huang, Xiaowen: 424
Huang, Yuan: 807
Huerta, Alvaro: 172, 173
Hur, Misun: 247
Husnein, Adnan: 555
Hwang, Ha: 131, 803
Hwang, Jinuk: 680
Hylton, Peter: 810
Iacobucci, Evan: 540
Ibrahim, Nancy: 471
Ilhamdaniah, Ilhamdaniah: 306
Im, Ha Na: 875
Imeokparia, Timothy: 886
Immergluck, Dan: 191, 246, 295
Inch, Andy: 601, 610
Iseki, Hiroyuki: 793, 809

Iuchi, Kanako: 84
Iversen, Michael: 619
Ives Dewey, Dorothy: 430
Izar, Priscila: 405
Jabareen, Yosef: 618
Jablonski, Becca: 461
Jackson, April: 241
Jacobs, Harvey: 434
Jacobson, Thomas: 513
Jang, Kitae: 101
Jang, Saewoom: 83
Janssen Jansen, Leonie: 621
Jaroszynski, Michal: 735
Jiang, Xiji: 157
Jiao, Junfeng: 287, 510, 738
Jin, Jangik: 808
Jin, Tony: 729
Jo, Jae-Uk: 43
Joh, Kenneth: 680, 744, 792
Johnson Ashley, Amanda: 623
Johnson, Bonnie: 564
Jon, Ihnji: 124
Jones, Carla: 787
Jones, Robert: 793
Jordan, Nicholas: 100
Jourdan, Dawn: 522, 864
Jourdan, Dawn: 522
Jun, Hee Jung: 263
Jung, Juchul: 79, 83, 142
Jung, Namji: 41
Jung, Yoonhee: 486
Kamel, Nabil: 330, 645
Kang, Bumjoon: 478, 484
Kang, Sanggyun: 719
Karki, Tej Kumar: 636
Karner, Alex: 662
Kash, Gwen: 361
Kashem, Shakil: 313
Kass, Amanda: 900
Kaufman, Jeff: 716
Kaufman, Ned: 456
Kaufman, Sanda: 566
Kayanan, Carla Maria: 46, 233
Kaza, Nikhil: 38
Kelley, Scott: 30
Kelley, William: 901
Kellogg, Wendy: 103, 563
Kemper, Rebecca: 256
Kent, Jennifer: 799
Khare, Amy: 206
Khojasteh, Maryam: 463, 478,
484, 498
Kickert, Conrad: 892
Kim, Anna: 314

Kim, Annette: 378
Kim, Boah: 202
Kim, Chung Ho: 363, 858
Kim, Donghyun: 656
Kim, Hong Bae: 649
Kim, Hyun: 294
Kim, Hyun Woo: 419
Kim, Jean: 814
Kim, Jeongseob: 134
Kim, Jongwoong: 272
Kim, Joongsub: 897
Kim, Jun Hyun: 234
Kim, Karl: 834, 835
Kim, Keuntae: 773
Kim, Minseon: 507
Kim, Minsoo: 827
Kim, Sujin: 474
Kim, Suk-Kyung: 651
Kim, Sungeun: 507
Kim, Sungyop: 754
Kim, Yonsu: 499
Kim, Young Jae: 813
Kim, Youngjun: 827
Kim, Yunji: 667
Kinahan, Kelly: 230
Kinebrew, Corrine: 341
King, David: 780
King, Denae: 502
King, Lester: 328
Kinzer, Kirsten: 145
Kittrell, Katherine: 442
Kjerland, Marc: 109
Klein Rosenthal, Joyce: 99, 161
Klein, Nicholas: 757, 767
Klein-Banai, Cynthia: 109
Kleit, Rachel: 326
Klenk, Nicole: 666
Klopp, Jacqueline: 711
Knaap, Eli: 342
Knapp, Courtney: 163
Kne, Len: 100
Ko, Yekang: 101
Kobayashi, Hisako: 387
Koh, Annette: 862
Kohon, Jacklyn: 184
Kotval-K, Zeenat: 465
Kraft, Benjamin: 15, 44
Kraus, Lewis: 307
Krause, Rachel: 559
Krishna, Ashima: 548
Krizek, Kevin: 536
Kuai, Yiwen: 797
Kudva, Neema: 393
Kuhlmann, Daniel: 248

Kutty, Asha: 185
Kwon, Jinwoo: 62
Lachapelle, Ugo: 727
Lahr, Michael: 62
Lakanen, Raili: 673
Lake, Robert: 602, 609
Lamb, Zachary: 547
Lamba Nieves, Deepak: 358
LaMontagne, Neal: 438
Landis, John: 448, 724
Lara, Jesus J: 848
Larice, Michael: 888
Larsen, Kristin: 519
Laskey, Allison: 334
Lassiter, Allispon: 151
Lauria, Mickey: 127, 583
Laurian, Lucie: 898
Lederman, Jaimee: 802
Lee, Bumsoo: 753
Lee, C. Aujean: 275
Lee, Chanam: 273, 508
Lee, Dalbyul: 79, 142
Lee, Danbi: 298
Lee, David Jung-Hwi: 670, 723
Lee, Dongkwan: 715
Lee, Eun: 679
Lee, Heonyeong: 656
Lee, Hyekyung: 72
Lee, Hyojung: 264
Lee, Hyun Kyung: 649
Lee, Jaechoon: 651
Lee, Jaekyung: 2
Lee, Jeasun: 507
Lee, Jee Young: 277
Lee, Jin Hui: 511
Lee, Junhak: 101
Lee, Kwan Ok: 336
Lee, Ryun Jung: 240
Lee, Sang: 178
Lee, Sang Won: 208
Lee, So Young: 10
Lee, Sugie: 37, 671
Lee, Sungmin: 497, 508
Lee, Sungwon: 753
Lee, Taehee: 613
Lee, Yongsung: 796
Legacy, Crystal: 601, 606
Leigh, Nancey Green: 37, 44
Lens, Michael: 267, 317
Lester, Thomas William: 38, 648
Levine, Jonathan: 825
Levine, Ned: 704
Lewis, Ferdinand: 568
Lewis, LaVonna: 471

Lewis, Rebecca: 426
Li, Chaosu: 11, 81
Li, Fei: 279
Li, Feng: 437
Li, Jianling: 569
Li, Lingling: 392
Li, Ming-Han: 419
Li, Wei: 234, 237, 504, 775
Li, Weifeng: 148
Li, Xin: 385
Li, Yunjing: 154
Li, Zelin: 763
Liao, Lu: 149
Licon, Carlos: 531
Lieberknecht, Katherine: 110
Lien, Hao-Ting: 865
Lienke, Jack: 210
Lieto, Laura: 588
Lim, Theodore: 80
Limon, Francisco: 247
Lin, Li Pin: 785
Lin, Lin: 512, 844
Lindell, Michael: 445
Lindsey, Greg: 720, 826
Ling, Shijia: 159
Linkous, Evangeline: 432
Linovski, Orly: 851, 857
Litt, Jill: 495
Littenberg, Benjamin: 481
Liu, Cathy: 189
Liu, Chao: 733, 750
Liu, Chao: 93
Liu, Tiantian: 3
Liu, Zhilin: 149
Livi Smith, Andrea: 585
Lobby, Samuel: 126
Loh, Carolyn: 415
Long, Judith: 449
Long, Mellone: 583
Looye, Johanna: 534
Lopez, Esteban: 339
Lorente, Paula: 90, 91
Loukaitou-Sideris, Anastasia:
214, 859
Lowe, Jeffrey: 328, 417
Lowe, Kate: 562
Lowe, Nichola: 647, 650
Lowery, Bryce: 490
Lozano-Torres, Yancili: 169
Lubell, Mark: 721
Luckey, Kara: 812
Luhr, Gretchen: 789
Lung-Amam, Willow: 172
Lutz, Barbara: 501

Lyles, Ward: 64, 139, 564
Lyles, Ward: 581
Lynch, Amy: 71, 82
Lyons, Leilah: 18
M. Rouhani, Omid: 739
Ma, Ting: 733
Macedo, Joseli: 391, 409
Machler, Leonard: 258
Mack, Elizabeth: 30, 31
Macmillen, James: 615
Maghelal, Praveen: 687, 855,
869
Mahmoudi, Dillon: 53
Mahyar, Arefi: 343
Makarewicz, Carrie: 249
Makido, Yasuyo: 348
Malizia, Emil: 36
Mandarano, Lynn: 66
Manville, Michael: 248, 770
Marantz, Nicholas: 421
Margerum, Richard D: 104
Marsden, Greg: 732
Marshall, Wesley: 752, 812
Martens, Karel: 593, 819, 841
Martinelli, Flavia: 589
Martinez, Arianna: 168
Masterson, Jaimie: 457
Mathur, Shishir: 331
Matsui, Taotao: 539
Matsumoto, Naka: 165
Mattiuzzi, Elizabeth: 646
Maurer, Samuel: 322
Mawhorter, Sarah: 276
Mayere, Severine: 104
McAndrews, Carolyn: 688
McCabe, Brian: 211
McClure, Kirk: 245
McDonald, Katherine: 305
McDonald, Noreen: 236
McElmurry, Shawn: 415
McMillan, Andrew: 300
McPike, Jamie: 389
McRee, Annie-Laurie: 1
Meakins, Gail: 483
Mednik, Nataly: 841
Meenar, Mahbubur: 66
Mehta, Vikas: 890
Mei, Ciqi: 149
Meltzer, Rachel: 35
Mendez, Joel: 783
Mendez, Michael: 172, 174
Mendez, Roselyn: 321
Meng, Ting: 496
Merem, Edmund: 187

Merlin, Louis: 718, 825
Meyer, Justin: 284
Meyer, Michele: 457
Miao, Tai-An: 354, 634
Micklow, Amanda: 253
Middel, Ariane: 160
Miles, Rebecca: 467
Millard-Ball, Adam: 821
Miller, Donald: 74
Miller, Harvey: 657
Miller, Matt: 725
Mills, Sarah: 658
Milz, Dan: 18, 560
Minassians, Henrik: 740
Minner, Jennifer: 461
Mitchell, Carrie: 459
Mittal, Jay: 364
Miyazato, Takamasa: 877
Modlinska, Ewa: 203
Moga, Steven: 546
Mohamed, Rayman: 144
Mohammadzadeh, Mohsen:
375
Mohebbi, Mehri: 528
Mokhtarian, Patricia: 236, 302
Mondschein, Andrew: 787
Monkkonen, Paavo: 266, 317
Monroe, Ashley: 92
Monsere, Christopher: 705
Montenegro, Flavia: 23
Montero, Sergio: 607
Montgomery, Brittany: 382
Moomaw, Suzanne: 542
Moore, James: 124
Moos, Markus: 212, 231
Morales, Alfonso: 480, 491
Morckel, Victoria: 228, 517
Morford, Shawn: 485
Morris, Eric: 236, 749
Morrison Hawkins, Breanna:
471
Morrow, Gregory: 333
Mosbah, Simon: 71, 693
Mostafavi, Nariman: 21
Motoyama, Yasuyuki: 34, 36
Mouat, Clare: 601
Moulaert, Frank: 589
Mueller, Elizabeth: 446
Muhammad, Imran: 847
Muller, Brian: 133, 495
Murakami, Jin: 747
Murdoch, James: 271
Myers, Dowell: 209
Nagpure, Ajay: 731

Naji, Ammar: 223
Nakamura, Shohei: 388
Nam, Yunwoo: 406
Namin, Sima: 116, 493
Nance, Earthea: 417, 502
Nasar, Jack: 870
Navarro, Sandy: 471
Ndubisi, Forster: 899
Neal, Margaret: 789
Neff, Donna: 501
Negahdarikia, Paria: 746
Nelessen, Anton: 850
Nelson, Marla: 417
Neog, Dristi: 823
Nesse, Katherine: 45
Newman, Galen: 2, 240, 543,
779
Ng, Wei Shiuen: 776
Nguyen, Mai: 262
Niemeier, Deb: 335
Nixon, Hilary: 695, 710, 717
Noh, Soowoong: 698
Nolan, Lauren: 52, 298
Noland, Robert: 850, 867
Norton, Richard: 156
Nostikasari, Dian: 591
Oast, Robert: 874
Odom, LaRhonda: 187
Olshansky, Robert: 417
Olson, Katelin: 545
Olwert, Craig: 832
Oner, Asli Ceylan: 433
Ong, Paul: 214
Ortega, Elizabeth: 631
Ory, Marcia: 508
Osland, Anna: 415
Osman, Taner: 50
Ouyang, Yiqiang: 845
Ozawa, Connie: 566
Pan, Haozhi: 17, 20
Pan, Qisheng: 729, 762
Pan, Xiaohong: 700
Pang, Hao: 736
Pant, Pradip: 834
Paris, Soren: 14
Park, Han: 237, 775
Park, Hyungjun: 83
Park, Janice: 283
Park, Jeong Il: 37
Park, Jiyoung: 124, 803
Park, Junsung: 134
Park, Sun Young: 234
Park, Yunmi: 450, 868
Parker, Robert: 426

Paterson, Robert: 147, 736
Patterson, Kelly: 265
Patton, David: 807
Paulsen, Kurt: 290, 808
Peacock, Walter Gillis: 72, 457
Pearce, Jane: 847
Pech, Chhandara: 214
Pena, Sergio: 345
Pendyala, Ram: 236
Peng, Zhongren: 93, 136, 137,
146
Peralta, Juvencio: 247
Perez Burgos, Javier: 61
Perrotta, Alexis: 622
Perry, David: 902
Peterka, Michael: 826
Peters, Deike: 58
Petheram, Susan: 880
Pfeiffer, Deirdre: 213
Phal, Sophorn: 98
Phibbs, Peter: 303
Piatkowski, Daniel: 752
Pierce, Gregory: 416
Pierre, Lisa-Marie: 31
Pike, Susan: 721
Pimentel Walker, Ana Paula:
407
Pinel, AICP, Sandra Lee: 666
Pitt, Damian: 530
Pitt, David: 100
Pivo, Gary: 297
Plotch, Philip: 842
Pollans, Lily: 106
Pollard, Jane: 801
Pooyan, Zhila: 489
Porro, Roberto: 88
Porter, Libby: 586
Potter, Cuz: 589
Potter, James: 350
Potts, Ruth: 565
Poulussen, Juriën: 434
Price, Cody: 216
Proffitt, David: 657
Puniello, Orin: 867
Qian, Haifeng: 54
Qian, Liu: 155
Quiring, Steve: 457
Raciti, Antonio: 337
Radinsky, Joshua: 18
Rahe, Mallory: 485
Rahill, Guitele J.: 514
Rahman, Shahin: 552
Raj, Subhashni: 487, 582

Raja, Samina: 463, 466, 478,
484, 498
Rajbhandari, Subrity: 765
Ralph, Kelcie: 800, 805, 815
Ramasubramanian, Laxmi: 153
Ramaswami, Anu: 731
Ramos Santiago, Luis Enrique:
695
Rao, Meenakshi: 152
Rawlins, Rachael: 578
Ray, James: 198
Rayle, Lisa: 390, 440
Raymond, Elora: 295
Reardon, Kenneth: 417
Reichenbach, Michael: 100
Reid, Carolina: 219
Reina, Vincent: 244
Renne, John: 761
Renski, Henry: 32
Reyes Ruiz del Cueto, Laura
Alejandra: 296
Reyes-Sanchez, Ariadna: 324
Riekes Trivers, Ian: 233, 852
Riggs, William: 701, 846
Rigolon, Alessandro: 115
Rishi, Susmita: 395
Rising, James: 711
Rivera, Danielle: 193
Rivero, Juan: 602, 878
Roberts, Andrea: 177
Rocco, Mary: 204
Rodiek, Susan: 234, 497
Rodnyansky, Seva: 304
Rodriguez Ortiz, Natalia: 321
Rodriguez, Anthony: 458
Rofe, Yodan: 841
Rogers, George: 123, 450
Rohe, William: 281, 289
Rongerude, Jane: 533
Rosan, Christina: 112
Rosen, Jovanna: 235
Rosenbloom, Sandra: 494
Rosenheim, Nathanael: 462
Ross, Catherine: 670, 810
Rothfeder, Robin: 627
Rudolf, Robert: 350
Rukmana, Deden: 474
Rumbach, Andrew: 396, 521
Rumore, Danya: 575
Runck, Bryan: 100
Ryan, Brent: 617, 851, 882
Ryberg-Webster, Stephanie:
220
Rydin, Yvonne: 588, 600

Ryerson, Megan: 745
Saeed, Basheer: 809
Safra, Eli: 841
Saginor, Jesse: 273
Sajjadieh Khajouei, Ayeh: 288
Salon, Deborah: 818
Samanta, Aritree: 103, 563
Samples, Samantha: 873
Samuels, Linda: 544
Sanchez, Thomas: 14, 293
Sanderford, Andrew: 297
Sanders, Tonya: 226
Sanders, Rebecca: 703
Sandoval, Gerardo: 172, 176
Santiago, Luis: 68
Santiago-Bartolomei, Raul: 304
Santo, Charles: 760
Saphores, Jean-Daniel: 96, 778
Sarmiento, Carolina: 314, 318
Schaller, Susanna: 887
Schechtman, Judd: 99
Schenk, Todd: 570
Schilling, Joseph: 315
Schively Slotterback, Carissa:
100
Schneider, Robert: 691
Scholl, Lynn: 408
Schrock, Greg: 648
Schwartz, Alex: 245
Schweitzer, Lisa: 639
Sciara, GianClaudia: 678
Seasons, Mark: 299
Sehatzadeh, Bahareh: 728, 822
Sen, Lalita: 765
Seo, Hye-jeong: 79
Severcan, Yucel: 861
Seymour, Eric: 205
Shake, Joshua: 344
Shamsuddin, Shomon: 309
Shandas, Vivek: 152, 348
Shannon, Brettany: 311
Shatkin, Gavin: 379
Shaw, Jingsi: 280
Shen, Qianqi: 353, 590
Shen, Qing: 838
Shen, Suwan: 105
Shen, Yu: 786
Shih, Mi: 365, 431
Shim, Hanbyul: 59
Shin, Eun Jin: 741
Shin, Nah-yoon: 567
Shmueli, Deborah: 566
Shojaei, Reyhaneh Sadat: 327
Shoup, Donald: 683

Siembieda, William: 453
Siemiatycki, Matti: 608, 842
Silver, Christopher: 519, 527
Silverman, Robert: 265
Sims, J. Revel: 318
Singh, Amrita: 96
Singleton, Patrick: 706
Sipe, Neil: 69, 557
Skuzinski, Thomas: 669
Sletto, Bjorn: 377
Sloane, David: 551
Smart, Henry: 48
Smart, Michael: 757, 767
Smith, Janet: 310
Smith, Nick: 365
Smith, Richard: 336
Solis, Miriam: 130
Solitare, Laura: 541
Song, Jie: 146
Song, Seul Ki: 142
Song, Yan: 11
Sonn, Jung Won: 589
Sorensen, Andre: 550
Sorensen, Janni: 221
Sosa Lopez, Oscar: 360
Sotomayor, Luisa: 386
Sowell, Jason: 889
Spahr, Christopher: 480, 491
Spain, Allison: 436
Spak, Scott: 509
Spevack, Anne: 283
Spinak, Abby: 554
Spirandelli, Daniele: 88
Spurlock, Danielle: 572
Stav, Tamy: 164
Stefanich, Joseph: 691
Steif, Kenneth: 257
Steil, Justin: 210
Steiner, Ruth: 501, 568, 732
Stephenson, Max: 639
Sternberg, Ernest: 630
Stevens, Mark: 423
Stiftel, Bruce: 518
Stoy, Kelan: 390
Strauss, Eric: 522
Stults, Melissa: 108
Suerth, Lauren: 500
Suguri, Vitor: 686
Sung, Sangwoo: 19
Sung, Seyoung: 777
Sweet, Elizabeth L: 886
Syal, Shruti: 397
Szibbo, Nicola: 903
Tabatabaie, Sara: 495

Tagore, Pratiti: 436
Takahashi, Lois: 28
Talen, Emily: 519, 526
Tang, Jian: 157
Tang, Zhenghong: 4, 445
Tani, Akihiko: 877
Tate, Laura: 329, 587, 588
Taylor, Brian: 805, 815
Taylor, Crystal: 503
Taylor, Zack: 653
Teicher, Hannah: 441
Terzano, Kathryn: 517
Tesso, Gizachew: 340
Thacher, David: 549
Thakuriah, Piyushimita Vonu:
690
Theis, Thomas: 109
Thom, Michael: 40
Thomas, Alainna: 371
Thomas, June: 624
Thomas, Ren: 520
Thomas, Talya: 196
Tian, Guang: 713
Tighe, J. Rosie: 207, 255
Tilahun, Nebiyou: 817
Timm, Stephanie: 94
Tio, Rosaline: 471
Toker, Zeynep: 740
Tolford, Tara: 761
Torrado, Marla: 370
Torres, Ariam: 68, 86
Torres, Nilton Ricoy: 640
Torres-Lima, Pablo: 666
Towne Jr, Sam: 508
Trapenberg Frick, Karen: 579,
842
Tremoulet, Andree: 269
Troy, Austin: 481
Trumbull, Nathaniel: 124
Tsai, Oscar: 675
Tucker, Jennifer: 605
Tulach, Nicholas: 867
Tung, Chienhung: 638
Umemoto, Karen: 354, 602
Usher, Kareem: 505
Valdez-Torres, Yazmin: 758
Vale, Lawrence: 229, 547
Van der Krabben, Erwin: 434
van Lierop, Dea: 709
Van Maasakkers, Mattijs: 420,
576
Van Zandt, Shannon: 237, 457
Vanik, Leonor: 22
Varady, David: 528

Vaughn, Tay: 40
Vazquez Castillo, Maria Teresa:
556
Vega-Fontanez, Hagmel A.: 321
Vella, Karen: 104
Vella, Karen: 557
Verbeek, Thomas: 469
Vidal, Avis: 286
Vidyarthi, Sanjeev: 604
Vo, Tom: 702
Voelkel, Jackson: 152
von Rabenau, Burkhard : 715
Vos, Jaap: 433, 529
Voulgaris, Carole: 805, 815
Waddell, Paul: 322
Wagle, Gaurish: 855
Wagner, Fritz: 902
Wagner, Jacob: 417, 896
Waldner, Leora: 435
Walsh, Elizabeth: 319
Walter, Rebecca: 198, 224, 252
Wang, Chihhao: 7
Wang, Fangru: 670, 734
Wang, Huaqing: 543
Wang, Kyungsoon: 191, 295
Wang, Lan: 157
Wang, Rui: 227
Wang, Ruoniu: 224, 261
Wang, Shenhao: 571
Wang, Xiaoguang: 807
Wang, Xinhao: 13
Wang, Xize: 699
Wang, Yiming: 782
Warner, Mildred: 654, 664
Warren-Kretzschmar, Barty:
531
Way, Heather : 315
Webb, Michael: 262, 281
Webber, Steven: 425
Weber, Matthew: 205, 254
Weber, Rachel: 592
Weber, Rachel: 588
Wegmann, Jake: 287, 510
Wei, Dehui: 437
Weiner, Marc: 850
Weinreich, David: 755
Weinstein, Alan: 522
Welch, Timothy: 734
Wen, Frank: 702

Wen, Frank: 843
Wen, Hui: 668
Wen, Xiaoyi: 424
Wernstedt, Kris: 473
Wesley, Joan: 168, 187
Wessells, Anne Taufen: 635
While, Aidan: 301, 610
White, David: 127
White, James: 849, 851
White, Stacey: 581
Whiteman, Eliza: 477
Whittaker, Jennifer: 479
Whittemore, Andrew: 168, 853
Whittington, Jan: 842
Widmer, Jocelyn: 519, 524
Wiebe, Douglas: 28
Wieters, Kathleen Meghan: 429
Williams, Jennifer: 349
Williams, Sarah: 25
Willson, Richard: 692
Wilson, Barbara: 181
Wilson, Bev: 313
Wilson, Patricia: 525
Winkle, Curt: 168
Winslow, Jane: 78
Wirsching, Andrea Christina:
119
Wissoker, Peter: 39
WolfPowers, Laura: 626, 650
Wolfson, Julian: 180
Won, Jae Woong: 508
Wong, Karna: 291
Woo, Ayoung: 680, 744
Woo, Myungje: 43, 56, 427
Wood, Brittany: 758
Wood, James: 686
Woodburn, Amber: 830
Woodruff, Sierra: 108
Woods, David : 641
Wu, Fulong: 365
wu, liang: 12
Wu, Weiping: 831
Wubneh, Mulatu: 282
Wuerzer, Thomas: 529
Xia, Haishan: 743
Xia, Nankai: 182
Xiao, Yu: 102, 232, 482
Xiao, Yuan: 451
XU, Jing: 652

Xu, Junping: 792
Xu, Minjie: 273
Xu, Ruoying: 283
XU, Xingjing: 659
Xu, Yuanshuo: 654
Yamashita, Eric: 834
Yang, Dongwoo: 714
YANG, FAN: 652
Yang, Tianren: 518
Yang, Yizhao: 437
Yao, Lingyan: 29
Yao, Xin: 54
Yerena, Anaid: 190
Yin, John: 847
Yin, Li: 12, 265
Yoo, Sanglim: 65
Yoo, Seungjoon: 507
Yoon, Dong Keun: 134, 294
Yoon, Heeyeun: 325
Yoon, Sulhee: 501, 506
Young, Robert: 637
Yu, Chia-Yuan: 475
Yuan, Quan: 412
Yun, Jongjin: 56
Zambonelli, Vera: 183
Zanotto, Juliana: 629
Zapata, Marisa: 455
Zellner, Moira: 18
Zhang, Chen: 731
Zhang, Chun: 742, 743
Zhang, Eva: 330
Zhang, Ming: 738, 772
Zhang, Qiong: 717
Zhang, Wenjia: 772
Zhang, Xin: 870
Zhao, Jinhua: 16, 571, 763, 786,
804
ZHAO, PENGJUN: 836
Zhao, Xiaojing: 157
Zhao, Zhan: 16, 763
Zhihao, Yao: 422
Zhong, Haotian: 816
Zhou, Jiangping: 682
Zhu, Dan: 89
Zhu, Pengyu: 684
Zitcer, Andrew: 602, 612
Zuk, Miriam: 242
Zwick, Paul: 223

Keyword Index
AB 32: 158
abandoned property: 456
abandonment: 205
Abu Dhabi: 869
academic outcomes: 244
acceptability: 505
access: 217, 408, 505, 515, 626,
693, 787
access to opportunity: 249
accessibility: 505, 593, 657,
711, 734, 766, 786, 817, 819,
825, 836
accessibility measures: 728,
822
accessibility to employment:
726
accessory dwelling units: 333
accommodation: 505
acculturation: 478
accuracy measures: 17
action: 108, 594
action research: 394, 525, 535
active commuting to school:
478
active frontages: 892
active learning: 534
active learning pedagogies: 533
active transportation: 484
active travel: 503, 720
active travel to school: 813
activism: 176
activity participation: 749
activity space: 714, 766
activity-based model: 803
actor network theory: 592, 600
actor structure: 250
actor-network: 588
adaptation: 108, 121, 136, 150,
430, 441
adaptation planning: 146
adaptation strategies: 137
adaptive capacity: 120, 563,
adaptive planning: 469, 666,
855
adjusted interrupted timeseries (aits) method: 221
advocacy: 186, 446, 564
advocacy organizations: 190

affordability: 505, 761
affordable housing: 190, 210,
216, 244, 253, 279, 291, 297,
300, 304, 318, 319, 326, 340,
812, 903
affordable housing policy: 335
affordable housing
preservation: 260
affordable housing program:
237
Africa: 398
African American: 545
Agamben: 590
age: 715
age difference: 738
agent-based modeling: 256
agent-based models: 718
agglomeration: 784, 793, 810
agglomeration economies: 768
agglomeration economies and
diseconomies: 33
aging: 460, 467, 494, 754, 758
aging in place: 470
aging population: 465
agonism: 586
agricultural land loss: 410
agricultural viability: 479
agriculture: 143, 352
AHP: 288
AICP Code of Ethics and
Professional Conduct: 583
aid: 482
air monitoring: 502
air pollution: 93, 159, 502, 770
air quality: 148
air transportation: 693
airflow: 93
airport expansion.: 693
airport planning: 830
airports: 693
airports and economic
development; incentive
programs; international
aviation: 745
Alacati: 433
alcohol and activities: 834, 835
alcohol outlets: 704
alternative development: 573
alternative transportation: 730
amenities: 233
amenity: 134
amenity migration: 433

American community curvey:
843
analytical hierarchy process:
105
analytical methods: 242
anchor institutions: 284
annexation: 240
anticommons: 633
architecture review: 522
art museums: 284
artist: 29
arts and culture: 268
arts district: 29
Asian city: 882
Asian comminuty: 847
Asian immigrants: 814
assemblage: 588, 595, 600
assemblage urbanism: 614
assessment: 674
attitudes: 839
Auckland: 847
Australia: 69, 557
authenticity: 311
authoritarianism: 590
authority: 612
auto dealers: 801
auto ownership: 767
automated vehicles: 718, 759,
764
automobile management: 571
automobile ownership: 801
autonomy: 632
availability: 505
barranquilla: 390
barriers: 180
basic needs: 356
bay area: 335, 662
behavior: 763
behavioural intentions: 709
Beijing: 148
Beirut: 366
benefit-cost analysis: 137
benzene: 502
best practice: 94
best practices: 123
Bhuj: 364
bibliometrics: 518
bicycle: 691, 837
bicycle-vehicle crash: 708
bicycles: 701
bicycling: 696, 703, 752
bicycling barriers: 703

big data: 25, 481, 841
bike: 818
bike infrastructure: 373
bike infrastructure: 373, 734
bike share: 685
bike/ped facilities: 710
bikesharing: 733
biking: 781
binational planning: 556
biogeochemistry: 141
biomass: 128
bioregional planning: 531
biotechnology industry: 650
blight: 228, 315
blues development: 573
Bogota: 795
Boomtowns: 42
Boston: 39
boundary organizations: 459
boundary work: 570
Brazil: 400
Brazilian: 183
breastfeeding: 164
brewery: 45
brownfield redevelopment: 568
BRT: 361, 390, 731, 795, 879
buildings: 97
built and natural environment:
813
built environment: 11, 477,
481, 483, 497, 511, 585, 702,
707, 708, 713, 715, 737, 766,
785, 814, 816, 867, 869, 871
bus mode: 717
Bus Rapid Transit (BRT): 408,
681, 773, 879
Business improvement districts:
434
business location: 31
business recruitment: 47
by-right development: 885
CA-Markov model: 13
California: 158, 186, 675
call detail record (CDR): 16
Cambodia: 98
camp: 247
campus planning: 225
Canada: 333, 520, 537
capacity building: 163, 186
Cape Town: 390
Capital Bikeshare (CaBi): 733
capital investment: 382

car ownership: 302, 839
carbon mitigation: 154
carbon-efficiency: 753
career ladders: 650
cargo bikes: 701
case studies: 520, 521
case study: 153, 357, 533
causality: 273
cause and impact: 10
CBO (2008) Climate Change
policy and CO2 Emissions from
Passenger Vehicles. 2008: 722
CBOs: 381
CDBG: 330
cemetery: 889
census data: 9
central city: 213
centrality: 723
centralization: 539
charitable choice: 226
Chicago: 647
children: 503, 871
China: 93, 159, 218, 270, 353,
365, 371, 376, 385, 392, 394,
404, 431, 437, 451, 512, 683,
831, 839
Chinese: 188
Chinese city: 12
Chinese history: 543
Cincinnati: 272
cities: 401
citizen participation: 553
citizenship: 186, 599, 606
Citizenship; Temporality; Ethics;
City Design and Development:
616
city and county partnership:
197
city environment perception:
763
city planning: 188
city services: 239
city-clusters: 659
Ciudad Juárez: 556
civic design: 891
civic engagement: 163, 623
civic innovation: 661
civil defense: 547
civil society: 539
Cleveland: 220
climate adaptation: 64, 67, 139,
161, 457

climate change: 65, 77, 85, 95,
108, 114, 117, 121, 146, 155,
158, 179, 359, 411, 430, 441,
456
climate change adaptation: 70,
99, 459, 547, 584, 677
climate change adaptation and
mitigation policy: 872
climate change resilience: 401
climate justice: 70, 174
climate planning: 174, 672
climate resilience: 509
climate variability: 473
climate-induced flooding
hazards: 70
cluster: 26
clusters: 352
coastal adaptation: 85
coastal city: 153, 459
coastal comminuty: 146, 84,
677
coastal flooding: 136
coastal hazards: 99
coastal Planning: 121
coastal zone management: 445
code barriers: 429
code enforcement: 471
cognitive change: 634
cohort effects: 699
collaboration: 100, 103, 352,
518, 635, 730
collaborative: 564, 591
collaborative governance: 104,
274, 565, 735
collaborative learning: 519
collaborative planning: 114,
334, 560, 570, 575, 576
collaboratives: 566
collective action: 111, 688
collective decision-making: 312
collective impact: 480, 491
colonia: 463
colonias: 119, 193
combined sewer overflows: 63
commemoration: 551
commercial use: 875
commodification: 886
commodity flow: 670
common good: 613
common goods: 604
communication: 69, 564
communicative: 591

communities: 530
community: 278, 288, 299, 306,
334, 398, 585
community and economic
development: 272
community benefits: 301
community capacity: 66
community capital: 66
community change: 150
community development: 22,
166, 197, 204, 226, 235, 239,
268, 271, 284, 304, 312, 321,
328, 402, 446, 487, 528, 535,
846, 877, 883
community disaster resilience:
83
community engaged design:
181
community engaged research:
446
community engagement: 203,
480, 491, 730
community health: 499, 508
community land trusts: 292
community lending: 380
community opposition: 601
community organizing: 471
community participation: 250,
274, 368, 381, 568
community rating system: 75
community recovery: 232
community reintegration: 215
community resilience: 153, 411
community story: 568
community-based
organizations: 178
community-based planning: 99
community-based practice: 312
community-university: 635
community-university
partnerships: 535
commute alternatives: 840
commuter corridor: 879
commuting: 1, 691, 829, 840
comparative international
development: 858
comparative research: 652
compassion: 64, 581
competition: 729
competitiveness: 38, 810
complete street: 710,879
complete streets: 774, 780

complex ecologies: 393
complex network analysis: 723
complex system: 619
complex urban system: 20
complexity: 256
comprehensive community
development: 330
comprehensive plan: 263
comprehensive planning: 438
comprehensive plans: 455
compromise: 604
compulsory purchase: 439
concentrated pockets of
poverty: 316
concentration of poverty: 279
conditional cash transfer: 400
conditional logistic regression:
691
conflict: 601
conflict between formal and
informal economy: 827
congestion pricing: 770, 811
congregation: 226
connectivity: 565
consensus: 601
consensus building: 420
conservation biology: 127
conservation easements: 127
conservation planning: 555
conservation subdivision
design: 135
conservation subdivisions: 144
conservative politics: 114
constraints: 237, 711
construction cycles: 592
consumption: 68
consumptive landscapes: 886
contact: 183
content analysis: 341, 687
contested narratives: 111
contextual mobility: 336
contracting: 783
cooperative development: 659
coral reef: 138
corridor revitalization: 879
counter culture: 195
CPTED: 507
crash analysis: 820
crash severity: 715
crashes: 716, 807
creative industries: 862
creative placemaking: 27

crime: 256
crime: 361
critical discourse analysis: 644
critical infrastructure: 105
critical pedagogy: 377
critical thinking: 534
cross-cultural: 870
cross-disciplinary: 885
crosswalk: 837
crowd sourcing: 25
crowd sourcing: 696
cultural city movement: 27
cultural competency: 532
cultural economy: 29
cultural economy: 59
cultural landscape: 894
cultural revitalization: 862
culture: 23, 94, 165, 166, 585
customer satisfaction: 709
cycling: 1, 373, 727, 799
damages: 90
data: 504
data collection tools: 25
data fusion: 16
data mining: 16, 845
data visualization: 25
Dayton: 171
DC: Congressional Budget
Office: 722
deal making: 578
decent work: 400
decentralization: 353, 666, 668
decision-making: 250, 473, 655
decision-making processes: 299
decision-support tool: 112
decision support system: 100
decline: 205
decolonization: 586
Deepwater Horizon oil spill: 502
Deleuze and Guattari: 631, 632
Delhi: 395
deliberation: 641
deliberative participation: 641
deliberative planning: 186
democracy: 164, 603, 688
demographic change: 60
demolition: 228
densification: 324
density: 340, 729
density bonus: 578
density bonuses: 447
density pattern: 870

density threshold: 753
dependency: 841
depopulation: 240
design: 216, 455
design guidelines: 859, 872
design moment: 881
design regulation: 577
design review: 522
Detroit: 239, 254, 274, 334
developing countries: 346, 361,
398
developing country: 89, 492
developing suburbs: 470
development: 149, 352, 358,
408, 582
development effectiveness:
346
development planning: 376
development policy: 404
diaspora: 177, 179
difference: 183
Difference-in-Differences
Estimators: 694
digital platform: 23
Direct Ridership Model (DRM):
750
disability: 22
disadvantaged children: 680
disaster: 277, 399, 402, 482,
514
disaster damage: 79
disaster planning: 473
disaster recovery: 99, 102, 417
disaster resilience: 359, 387
disaster risk: 368, 384
disasters: 123
discourse: 591
discourse analysis: 857
discrete event simulation: 786
disinvestment: 205, 228
displacement: 176, 192, 214,
242, 250, 283, 323, 357, 403
dispossession: 431
distance-to-school: 813
distributed networks: 661
divergent development: 50
diverse economies: 614
diversity: 9, 165, 170, 179, 187,
188, 235, 456, 532, 878
diversity planning: 189
DIY Urbanism: 614
documentary film: 534

Dominican Republic: 377
downtown: 537, 556, 695
downtown housing: 238
downtowns: 238
downturn: 62
driver attitudes: 705
driving emissions: 737
DRM: 733
drug policy: 549
DWI: 704
dynamic pricing: 692
ecological planning: 627, 856
ecological structures: 116
ecological wisdom: 637
ecology: 899
econometric: 137
economic benefits: 124
economic competitiveness: 723
economic development: 30, 32,
36, 43, 44, 51, 53, 57, 235, 268,
392, 421, 425, 485, 545, 668,
684, 693, 695, 784, 900
economic development
practice: 47
economic downturn: 767
economic growth: 77, 773
economic impact analysis: 61,
670
economic  impact: 440
economic incentive program:
73
economic inequality: 456
economic opportunities: 198
economic opportunity: 35
economic policy: 655
economic recession: 206
economic restructuring: 404,
542
economic self-sufficiency: 316
economics: 504
ecosystem: 663
ecosystem services: 68, 90,
100, 509
ecosystem services: 86
ecosystem valuation: 86
Edjteyah: 876
education: 781
EEG: 763
El Paso: 556
elasticity of transit ridership:
689
elected officials: 444

electric vehicles: 788
emergency facility: 105
emergency management: 473
emergency planning: 123
emergency shelter: 489
emerging markets: 831
eminent domain: 439
emissions: 657
emotion: 596, 763
empirical study: 182
employment: 35, 38
employment barriers: 198
employment location: 747
encounter: 183
energy consumption: 21, 125
energy efficiency: 97, 319
energy use: 160, 243, 309
engaged scholarship: 535
engagement: 393, 524
entranceway; entryway: 540
entrepreneur: 663
entrepreneurial actors: 887
entrepreneurial city: 857
entrepreneurship: 30, 31, 32,
36, 49, 900
Entropy index: 875
environment: 480, 515, 787
environmental aesthetics: 865
environmental assessment: 458
environmental attitudes: 73
environmental awareness: 68
environmental damages: 124
environmental health: 469, 502
environmental humanities: 627
environmental impact: 142
environmental impact analysis:
794
environmental  impact: 135
environmental justice: 65, 67,
70, 115, 116, 119, 130, 139,
161, 174, 313, 319, 412, 418,
469, 471, 493, 572, 830
environmental knowledge: 493
environmental law: 802
environmental management:
96
environmental planning: 86,
104, 123, 141, 397, 502, 584,
619
environmental planning
education: 531
environmental pollution: 541

environmental protection: 413
environmental stewardship:
195
environmental sustainability:
268
environmental vulnerabilities:
493
environmentalism: 149
envision tomorrow: 736
equality: 29
equitable development: 650
equity: 112, 126, 180, 270, 290,
408, 455, 487, 544, 581, 582,
760, 770, 817, 819, 840, 901
equity outcomes: 181
equity pedagogy: 528
equity planning: 163, 624
ESDA: 628
essential injustice: 599
established food system: 487
ethical standards: 617
ethics: 446, 594, 614, 639
ethnic comminuty: 741
ethnic enclave: 170
ethnic enclaves: 741
ethnic restaurants: 183
ethnic segregation: 170
ethno-racial comminuty: 320
ethnoscapes: 643
Euclidean zoning: 414
evaluation: 14, 613
every day: 886
evidence-based public health
practice: 513
ex-offenders: 198
exactions: 447
exclusionary zoning: 414
experimental methods: 346
experimentation: 358, 600
expertise: 106, 598, 603
exploratory spatial data
analysis: 656
export: 723
exposure assessment: 720
external factors: 717
external-household carpools:
741
exurban: 426
eye-tracking: 850
facilitation: 560
facilitative planner: 525
faculty: 14

fair housing: 210
fairness: 593
faith-based: 226
farm policy: 554
farmland preservation: 658
farmworker: 247
fatality: 716
federal housing policy: 219
federal loans: 554
federal policy: 828
film: 534
financial constraints: 829
financialization: 39
financialized housing policy:
405
fine particulate (pm2.5): 93
firm formation: 773
firm location: 784, 793
first world and third world
cities: 362
fiscal austerity: 664
fiscal  impact: 440
fiscal stress: 667
fiscal tools: 447
flaneur: 863
flash floods: 359
Flickrs: 826
flood damages: 91
flood hazards: 90
flood mitigation: 75
flood risk: 441
flooding: 72
Florida: 764
food: 466
food access: 462, 477, 486
food desert: 464
food deserts: 487
food environment: 481
food insecurity: 463, 477
food policy: 488, 498
Food Policy Council: 462
food security: 476, 490
food sovereignty: 631
food system: 461, 476, 500,
873
food system planning: 488,
498
food trucks: 884
food vendors: 429
forced evictions: 428
forecasting: 702
foreclosure: 315

foreclosure crisis: 219
foreclosures: 200, 300
foreign born: 180
foreign direct investment: 33
foreign-born: 171
foreign-born parents: 478
form-based codes: 8
former French concession: 895
foundations: 204
fracking: 415
framework: 585
framing: 251
freedom: 582
freight  land_use: 719
freight modeling: 670
freight movement: 723
freight rail; equity; ethics: 562
freight transportation: 828
frequency: 708, 727
full Bayesian: 708
funding: 755
future: 209
gasoline prices: 689, 778
gateway: 540
gateway comminuty: 730
gayborhood: 167
gender: 175, 361, 715
gender gap: 169
gender quotas: 169
Generation Y: 231
genre: 612
gentrification: 10, 35, 167, 172,
211, 214, 217, 242, 260, 262,
272, 283, 284, 292, 320, 323,
328, 458, 681
gentrification and
displacement: 843
geodesign: 8
geographic information system:
2, 202, 464, 702
geographic scale: 798
geographic weighted
regression: 654
geographical analysis: 818
geographically weighted
regression: 750, 807
geography of opportunity: 224
Germany: 538
Ghana: 351
ghetto: 741
GHG emissions: 158

GIS: 9, 19, 65, 101, 506, 698,
779, 807, 823, 845, 901
GIS applications: 841
global capitalism: 638
global financial crisis: 608
Global South: 395, 403
global urbanization: 584
globalization: 643
goods movement: 780
376, 418, 435, 558, 755
governance: 103, 113, 296,
356, 376, 398, 415, 418, 421,
435, 558, 565, 640, 661, 755
governance network: 674
government: 422
government housing
regulation: 280
government sponsorship: 34
governmental rationalities: 610
governmentality: 640
graph theory: 723
gravity model: 7
Great Recession: 267, 291, 317,
667
green and blue infrastructure:
893
green buildings: 101, 679
green industries: 37
green infrastructure: 63, 66, 67,
72, 78, 80, 82, 112
green jobs: 37
green locations: 37
green space: 503
green stormwater
infrastructure: 73
green streets: 789
greenbelt: 142
Greenbelt Policy: 413
greenhouse gas emission
reduction: 304
greenhouse gas emissions: 324,
753
greening action: 6
greenway: 503
groundwater: 604
growth: 62, 252
growth coalition: 204
growth diagnostics: 598
growth machine: 695
growth management: 426, 432,
671

growth management policy:
436
growth management tools: 436
GTFS data: 711
guerrilla urbanism: 338
guilty drivers: 715
Habitat for Humanity: 221
Haiti: 347, 399, 402, 514
happiness: 74, 350, 749, 883
hazard: 134
hazard exposure: 313
hazard mitigation: 64, 147, 411
hazardous materials: 123
hazards: 91
hazards mitigation: 457
haze pollution: 155
HBCU planning program: 187
HBCUs: 187
health: 78, 180, 418, 483, 494,
504, 515, 787
health and safety: 846
health disparities: 499
health equity: 471
health inequality: 180
health institution: 511
health promotion: 180
health services: 215
health-related built
environment: 714
healthcare accessibility: 501
healthcare inequality: 506
healthy city: 157, 511
healthy comminuty: 319, 495
healthy comminuty planning:
513
healthy community: 507
healthy food financing
initiative: 464
healthy housing: 319
heavy industries: 155
Hedonic housing price model:
838
Hedonic Model: 325, 734
Hedonic Price Models: 134,
694, 806
heritage: 177, 585
high-rise housing: 350
high-speed rail: 684
high-speed rail: 786
high-tech firms: 31
higher opportunity
neighborhoods: 316

highway construction: 814
hippietown: 195
historic districts: 9, 199
historic preservation: 9, 199,
211, 220, 230, 456, 522, 546,
548, 577, 877, 895
historical context: 390
history: 545, 550, 898
home: 876
homelessness: 215
homeowner: 277
homeownership: 196, 372
homesharing: 287
hometown associations: 358
Honolulu: 806
HOPE VI: 229
household characteristics: 651
household living arrangements:
264
household location choice: 249
household travel: 249
households: 482
housing: 196, 209, 212, 241,
247, 264, 269, 270, 276, 282,
285, 290, 293, 296, 300, 306,
314, 324, 372, 380, 388, 389,
454, 460, 514, 599, 620, 761
housing affordability: 191, 201,
263, 267, 276, 287, 303, 416
housing and health  impact:
194
housing assistance: 309
housing booms: 317
housing choice: 243
housing choice vouchers: 208,
245
housing conditions: 309
housing design: 885
housing development: 325
housing finance; housing
policies: 218
housing improvement: 194
housing instability: 244
housing market: 96, 213, 266,
295
housing mobility: 269
housing needs: 277
housing plans: 332
housing policy: 208
housing preference: 350
housing price: 868
housing price changes: 317

housing prices: 440, 726
housing provision: 747
housing subsidies: 267
housing supply: 258
housing vouchers: 342
housing; school; Asian
Americans: 275
HUD rental assistance: 201
human activity: 89
human capital development:
676
human dignity: 599
human mobility: 16
human rights: 398
human subsystem: 131
humanism: 602
hunger: 476
Hurricane Katrina: 277, 417
Hurricane Sandy: 102, 232
hydraulic fracturing: 119
identity: 166
Ildefonso Cerdà: 619
illegal outdoor commerce: 182
immigrant: 165
immigrant farm laborer: 463
immigrant friendly: 171
immigrant-led revitalization:
176
immigrants: 184, 186, 276, 314,
756
immigration: 172, 173, 178,
183, 333
immigration policy: 189
impact: 14, 518, 762
impact assessment: 132
impact evaluation: 346
implementation: 66, 566
import: 723
importance performance
analysis: 731
improvisation: 597, 642
incentives: 51
inclusion: 458, 591
inclusionary zoning: 279
inclusive innovation: 647
inclusive planning: 178
inclusivity: 9, 532
income: 512, 829
income distribution: 683
income inequality: 676
income segregation: 279
incompatible land-use: 471

income mixing: 903
incubators: 34
index: 112, 454
India: 359, 364, 388, 548
indicators: 153, 826
indices: 504
indigenous institutions: 666
indigenous peoples: 586
indigenous planning: 580
individual agency: 601
Indonesia: 381
industrial: 424
industrial city: 546
industrial land preservation:
425
industrial land renewal: 652
industrial structure: 43
industrial tourism: 785
industrialization: 392
inequality: 170, 405, 434
infill: 429, 653
informal city: 551
informal housing: 287
informal markets: 366
informal settlements: 119, 368,
377, 380, 463
informal transit: 361
informal transport: 390
informal urbanism: 333
informality: 173, 314, 366, 391,
633, 884
information; data;
environment; knowledge;
action: 24
infrastructure: 360, 373, 382,
472, 558, 830
infrastructure costs: 653
infrastructure financing: 831
infrastructure improvements:
346
infrastructure investment: 693
infrastructure planning: 688,
771
injury: 716
inner city: 38
innovation: 26, 32, 53, 524,
648, 650, 686, 887, 900
innovation system: 900
innovative finance: 842
institutional analysis: 113
institutional barriers: 836
institutional change: 550, 634

Institutional design: 434
institutional investment: 831
institutional racism: 295
institutional void: 570
Institutions: 397, 550
instrumental variables: 721
insurance: 453
insurgent planning: 370, 573,
631, 645
integrated water resource
management: 110
integration: 390
intensification: 653
intention to move: 308
intentional comminuty: 311
intercept survey: 756
intercity transportation: 693
interculturalism: 183
interdependence of decisions:
232
interdisciplinary: 393
interfaith dialogue: 162
intergovernmental relations:
755
intergovernmental
relationships: 353
intermunicipal: 669
intermunicipal cooperation:
660
internal factors: 717
international: 184
international comparative
analysis: 557
international comparative
research: 69
international comparison: 892
international development
planning: 521, 534
international planning: 365,
370, 396
Internet: 690
interpretive comminuty: 103
interstate highways: 816
intervention: 566
intraurban subcenters: 362
intrinsic motivation: 804
irrational: 596
irrational exuberance: 317
irreversibilities: 222
Israeli occupation and
Palestine: 876
Istanbul: 250

IUMAT: 21
Japan: 76, 183
Jenin refugee camp: 876
job accessibility: 729, 808
job creation: 542
judgement: 613
Just City: 395
justice: 129, 424, 544, 593, 613,
617, 622, 662
justice or access to justice: 341
K-means Cluster Analysis: 766
Kaga-Hashidate: 877
Kansas City: 881
kernel density: 793
knowledge: 563
knowledge sharing: 569
Koontz: 578
Korea: 350
Korea Working Condition
Survey: 656
Korean Saemaul Movement:
363
Labor Market Outcomes: 808
Lake Ontario: 131
land: 431
land abandonment: 779
land bank: 197
land banks: 443
land conservation: 132
land conversion: 451
land development: 684
land expropriation: 439
land lease: 282
land preservation: 413
land quotas: 451
land readjustment: 364
land suitability analysis: 13
land transformation model: 2
 land_use: 7, 184, 197, 256, 415,
418, 421, 432, 453, 454, 455,
707, 778, 802, 889
 land_use and transportation:
699, 719
 land_use change: 132, 240
 land_use density: 140
 land_use law: 549
 land_use mix: 798, 875
 land_use patterns: 202
 land_use planning: 15, 147, 384,
411, 419, 425, 430, 433, 440,
449, 572, 669
 land_use planning tools: 445

 land_use policy: 328, 500
 land_use prediction models: 2
 land_use regulations: 287, 541
 land_use transitions: 443
 land_use-travel connection: 772
land value: 412
land value betterment: 782
land value capture: 447
land value creation and
capture: 838
land values: 380, 442
land-use change: 17, 20
land-use planning; zoning: 452
landscape ecology: 91
landscape index: 234
landscape metrics: 90, 91
landscape planning: 531
landscape recovery: 856
landscape spatial patterns: 234
landslide: 134
lane conversion: 710
Latin America: 382
Latino: 186
Latino urbanism: 338
Laurentian Great Lakes: 156
law: 874
leadership: 312
lean urbanism: 338
learning: 26
learning outcome: 225
LEED-ND: 223, 903
legacy city: 204, 220, 230,
286, 624
legitimacy: 804
level of service: 794
leverage: 301
LGBT planning: 167
license plate auction: 804
LiDAR: 101
life cycle assessment: 324
life satisfaction: 749
life sciences: 49
life-cycle analysis: 160
lifecycle: 209
lifestyle: 45, 302, 474
light rail: 217, 762, 880
light rail train: 714
LIHTC: 297
linked trips: 701
liquefaction: 453
Lisbon: 854, 863
listening: 642

livability: 854
livable city: 321
local and regional planning: 44
local economic development:
48, 49
local entrepreneurship system:
34
local fiscal effort: 654
local flood planning: 75
local foods: 485
local government: 189, 239,
357, 391, 415, 435, 444, 463,
664, 669
local government policy: 498
local level: 677
local milieu: 832
local mobilization: 278
local mobilizing: 370
local planning: 303
local planning system: 387
local public finance: 317
local restructuring: 667
location: 45, 212, 247
location affordability: 191, 269
location choice: 342
location decision: 33
location efficiency: 297
location theory: 49
logarithmic regression: 717
logic: 628
logics: 130
logistic regression: 13
logistics cluster: 810
Logit Model: 715
London: 279
long-run elasticity: 772
long-time adaptation and
transformation: 363
Longitudinal Multilevel Model:
772
longitudinal studies: 336
Los Angeles: 50, 573, 843, 891
low carbon transportation: 788
Low Income Housing Tax
Credit: 318
low wealth households: 795
low- income housing: 192
low-income: 196, 253
low-income households: 336
low-income people: 270
loyalty: 709
LUCIS: 8

Lucknow: 548
Madison County: 410
main street: 890
major infrastructure: 842
major league sports facilities:
449
manufacturing: 43, 648
MAP 21: 716
maps: 25
Marcellus Shale gas extraction:
42
marginalization: 184
marginalized comminuty: 27
marinas: 124
marker: 540
market devices: 592
market failure: 496
market mechanisms: 80
market-based: 451
market-based instruments: 496
marketing: 709
Markov Chain model: 280
Masdar: 855
mass housing: 861, 882
mass rapid transit: 694
master planning: 658
match-paired analysis: 860
materiality: 588
mature suburbs: 470
MCA: 288
measurement: 10
mechanism: 26
media: 639
mediation: 610
mediatized: 639
mega structure demolition: 858
megaprojects: 428, 535, 842
megaregion: 141, 670
memory: 177
Meta-analysis: 423, 436, 442,
838, 868
Meta-regression: 423
methodology: 589, 602, 852
methods of engagement: 181
metrics: 14
Metro Blue Line: 777
metropolitan area: 252
metropolitan development:
448
metropolitan planning
organizations: 657
metropolitan region: 655

metropolitan transportation
planning: 678
Mexico: 345, 382
Mexico City: 296
Michigan: 46
microenterprise: 429
microfinance: 381
mid-sized city: 467
migrant settlement: 188
migration: 179, 358
Millennials: 209, 212, 213, 231,
236, 264, 272, 276, 302, 676,
800, 805, 815
mills: 546
mind: 596
minority: 412
Mississippi: 879
mitigation: 324
mix methods: 260
mixed Income: 229
mixed income housing.: 340
mixed  land_use: 845
mixed methods: 22
mixed use development: 340
mixed Use District: 736
mixed-income: 206, 241
mixed-methods: 591
MLM: 83
mobile vendors’ behavior: 182
mobility: 231, 244, 285, 408,
465, 494, 825
mobility options: 698
mode choice: 701, 706, 713,
776, 803
mode of production: 53
mode shift: 811
modeling: 702
modern streetcars: 771
modern urban heritage: 555
morality: 804
morphological evolution: 895
mortgage finance: 219
motorization: 159, 839
motorized travel distance: 690
motorized trip generation: 690
MOVES: 737
moving to work: 281
MPO: 716
MPOs: 678
MSA: 717
multi-family housing: 885
multi-level linear model: 726

multi-level modeling: 308
multi-modal planning: 752
multi-region prices inputoutput model: 649
multi-scalar politics: 389
multicultural urbanism: 643
multifunctional landscapes: 100
multiple criteria evaluation: 13
municipal incorporation: 435
municipal regulation: 884
municipal solid waste: 106
Nablus: 876
NAIP: 72
Nairobi: 711
narrative: 609, 612
Natech: 147
national education policy: 732
National Establishment Time
Series data: 49
national gateways: 723
National Historic Preservation
Act: 456
National Household Travel
Survey (NHTS): 700
natural disaster: 507
natural hazard: 79, 147
natural park: 134
natural resource management:
560, 565
nature: 787
nature connectedness: 86
NDVI: 72
Nearshore Water Quality: 131
negative binomial: 702
negotiation: 572, 642
neighborhood: 166, 306, 467,
512, 515, 545, 868, 874, 890
neighborhood ascent: 199
neighborhood change: 165,
211, 221, 242, 276, 537, 681,
777
neighborhood design: 450, 868
neighborhood development:
540
neighborhood disadvantage:
271
neighborhood diversity: 237
neighborhood housing market
resilience: 191
neighborhood impact: 292
Neighborhood Lifecycle Model:
256

neighborhood organizations:
330
neighborhood poverty: 336
neighborhood redevelopment:
861
neighborhood revitalization:
230, 330, 286
neighborhood safety: 497, 508
neighborhood satisfaction: 450
neighborhood stabilization: 220
neighborhood turnover: 450
neighborhood typology: 252
neighborhoods: 184, 252, 805,
902
neoliberal environments: 119
neoliberal planning: 311
neoliberal turn: 621
neoliberalized planning: 375
network governance: 565
network theory: 569
networks: 103, 104, 563
new comminuty: 233
new economy: 898
New England: 677
new firm formation: 768
new media: 311
New Orleans: 57, 111, 576, 896
New Urbanism: 241, 720
New York City: 538, 685
NHTS: 737
NIMBY: 149, 216
noise pollution: 541
non-linear programming: 6
non-motorized transportation:
774
non-point source pollution: 560
non-profits: 204
non-residential property
owners: 73
nonlinearities: 222
nonprofit housing developers:
291
nonprofit management: 291
nonprofit sector: 193
normative compliance: 804
normative planning: 78
north China: 155
nuclear energy policy: 567
nuclear war: 547
nuisance: 549
nuisance abatement: 315, 471
nutrition: 509

obesity: 474, 480, 481, 483,
491, 492, 512
OIF/OEF: 215
older adults: 497, 508, 686,
754, 746, 764
older drivers: 820
older suburbs: 200
online education: 519
online learning: 524
online planning tools: 5
online surveys: 752
open space: 869
open space: 632
opportunism: 547
opportunity: 251, 342
opportunity: 285
opposition to development:
610
ordinances: 113
Oregon: 426, 697
organic economics: 195
organization: 783
organizational and technology
capacity: 5
organizational collaboration:
569
organizations: 123, 130, 347,
399, 441
organizing: 296
original residents: 294
Osbaldiston: 87
Over-the-Rhine: 272
ownership: 424
panel analysis: 125
panel data: 689
paratransit: 765
paratransit: 731
park planning: 115, 472
park use: 180
parking: 683, 780, 797, 840
parking management: 692
Parking Pricing: 692, 776
parking requirements: 416
parks: 239, 730, 859
parks and open space: 902
participation: 23, 149, 311, 347,
367, 576, 606, 891
participatory budget: 407
participatory democracy: 614
participatory GIS: 398, 493
participatory governance: 552
participatory methods: 402

participatory planning: 5, 251,
321, 354, 525, 640, 848
participatory process: 122
particulate matter: 157, 502
passenger rail stations: 809
patch size: 90
path analysis: 810
path dependence: 550, 847
Patrick Geddes: 619
peak car: 767, 800
pedagogical styles: 522
pedagogy: 446, 525, 530, 534
pedestrian: 754
pedestrian safety: 816, 871
pedestrian volume: 875
pedestrians: 704
peer effects: 721
peer-learning: 521
perceived barriers: 73
perceived fairness: 571
perceived risk: 703
perceived walkability: 865
perception of space: 630
perceptions on neighborhood
environment: 478
performance: 143
performance evaluation: 319
performance measures: 783
performance-based parking:
692
performativity: 592
peri-urban: 394, 431
personal attitudes: 302
phenomenology: 602
Philadelphia: 80
philanthropic sector: 274
philanthropy: 204
Philippines: 150
Photovoice: 150
physical activity: 78, 472, 474,
483, 484, 492, 508, 512, 799
physical planning: 888
Pittsburgh: 253
place: 29, 183, 898, 899
place attachment: 166, 177,
577
place identity: 278
place-based planning
education: 529
place-based policy: 46
place-identity: 890
place-making: 854, 862, 882

placemaking: 183, 642, 897
plan evaluation: 445
plan horizon: 438
plan implementation: 156, 241,
821
plan process: 438
plan quality evaluation: 107,
419
planner as political leader: 636
planners: 423
planners’ perceptions: 445
planning: 301, 421, 454, 565,
582
planning administration: 583
planning and gender: 370
planning and law: 414
planning cultures: 365
planning curricula: 523
planning curriculum: 532
planning education: 522, 529,
533
planning ethics: 581, 583, 602
planning facilitation: 354
planning for resilience: 641
planning history: 538, 546, 552,
892
planning implementation: 145
planning improvement: 157
planning institutions: 678
planning law: 522
planning narratives: 597
planning organization: 5
planning participation: 623
planning pedagogy: 519, 523
planning policy: 537
planning practice: 532, 618,
642, 643
planning praxis: 354
planning process: 203, 488,
564, 632
planning processes: 64, 139
planning research: 557
planning roles: 143
planning scholarship: 608
planning schools: 187
planning service delivery: 660
planning strategies: 60
planning studio: 523
planning support: 575
planning support system: 17,
20, 603
planning theories: 618

planning theory: 95, 365, 564,
594, 597, 599, 601, 603, 619,
620, 621, 627, 630, 632, 637
plans: 604
PM2.5: 148
Poisson Lognormal Random
Effects Model: 708
policy: 89, 126, 158, 212, 293,
480, 482
policy analysis: 320, 628, 652
policy change: 190
policy implications: 717
policy innovation: 595
policy mapping: 341
policy meanings: 103
policy mobilities: 27, 595
policy solutions: 124
policy transfer: 371, 520, 609
policy transfer agents: 371
political economy: 51, 881
political empowerment of
planner: 636
political energy: 610
political fragmentation: 499
politics: 51, 620
polycentric  land_use: 362
pop-up projects: 623
population aging: 700
population and migration: 33
population distribution: 264
population forecasting: 15
Port-au-Prince: 399
Portland: 437
positive utility of travel: 706
post-disaster reconstruction
planning: 364
post-disaster recovery: 347
post-disaster recovery
planning: 896
post-industrial city: 897
post-political: 606
poverty: 193, 301, 383, 408,
412, 462, 474
poverty alleviation: 400
poverty concentration: 259
poverty deconcentration: 245
poverty reduction: 403
power: 250, 550, 640
power of planner-politician:
636
pragmatism: 603, 604, 641
predatory lending: 554, 801

preservation: 585
price premium: 144
pricing: 80, 683, 840
primary care accessibility: 506
private car use: 799
private initiative: 391
private land owners: 82
private sector: 441
private streets: 780
private-public development:
449
privatization: 206, 660
pro-environmental travel
behavior: 785
proactive planning: 879
problem-framing: 106
procedural justice: 567
procedural planning: 8
production of space: 22
profession: 596
professional practices: 592
progressive city: 552
progressive governance: 195
progressive planning: 673
project finance: 382
projects: 600
propensity score matching: 273
property rights: 254, 633
property tax: 345
property value: 234, 762, 806
protected lands: 730
prototypes: 460
proximity: 729
pubic participation: 251
public bicycle: 685
public consultation: 203
public dispute: 567
public education and
engagement: 575
public engagement: 354
public goods: 626
public health: 174, 481, 490
public health: 865
public housing: 206, 229, 281,
285, 289
public housing authorities: 326
public involvement: 688
public land authorities: 443
public memory: 551
public open space: 385
public opinion: 764
public outreach: 73

public participation: 299, 488,
555, 662
public private partnerships:
405, 842
public property management:
449
public rail transit: 891
public schools: 251
public services: 356, 439, 683
public space: 67, 164, 175, 544,
551, 626, 878, 884, 890, 891
public transit: 685, 686, 689,
753, 791, 799, 823, 839, 841
public transportation: 622, 731,
735, 783, 879
public transportation
infrastructure: 793
public transportation tourism:
785
public university: 644
public venture funds: 34
public-private coalitions: 695
public/private partnership: 330
publication bias: 423
PUD: 578
python script tools: 19
Qatar: 348
qualitative: 153
qualitative GIS: 271
qualitative longitudinal
research: 402
qualitative methodology: 591
qualitative research: 687
quality of life: 45, 515
quasi-experimental design: 273
queer space: 167
Queuing Theory: 786
Quito: 390
race: 435
race/ethnicity: 180
racial diversity: 340
racial inequality: 219
racial segregation: 499
radical planning: 260, 631
rail: 734
rail freight rates increase: 649
rail network: 747
rail transit: 750
rail transportation: 743
rapid urbanisation: 325
rapid urbanization: 348
rational: 564

Rational Planning Model: 598
rationality: 596
Real Estate: 39, 782
real estate financialization: 405
real estate tax: 345
real estate teaching: 523
rebuild by design: 121
recession: 209
reconfiguration of rural to
urban typologies: 856
reconstruction: 482
Reconstruction and
Development Programme
(RDP): 349
recovery: 84, , 482, 514
recreation: 68, 626
redevelopment: 97, 253, 357,
653, 853, 862, 887
reference framing: 571
reflective practice: 751
refugees: 366
regeneration: 338, 553
regenerative design: 319
Regime theory: 695
regional: 591, 666, 755
regional clusters: 30
regional development model:
392
regional discrepancies: 877
regional economic
development: 648
regional economy: 43
regional governance: 811
regional inequality: 654
regional institutions: 661
regional needs: 335
regional planning: 344, 556,
611, 625, 665, 672, 675, 678,
802, 828
regional transportation plan:
662, 819
regionalism: 660, 669, 735
regions: 352
regressive effects: 345
regulation: 97, 874
regulatory barrier: 416
reification: 886
REIT: 39
religion: 162
religious cluster: 162
relocation: 84
remote sensing: 410

renewal: 228
rental foreclosures: 208
renter: 277
representation: 377
requests for information (RFI):
47
research: 293
research agenda: 466
research domain: 518
research impact: 608
resettlement: 294
residential decision-making:
812
residential development: 873
residential development
process: 450
residential energy: 125
residential location: 302, 332,
690, 815
residential mobility: 280, 308
residential mortgage borrower:
341
residential mortgage finance
reform: 341
residential preference: 212, 258
residential property values: 694
residential satisfaction: 308,
861
residential stability: 309
residential use: 875
resilience: 62, 91, 95, 102, 108,
121, 126, 352, 366, 394, 441,
507, 897, 899
resilience planning: 417
resiliency: 114, 256, 457
resistance to environment
regulation: 513
resource-based economy: 404
respiratory health: 157
response space: 120
responsible property
investment and development:
297
results-based assessments: 346
results-based development:
598
retail: 323
retail activities: 809
retail center: 860
retail chains: 832
retailers: 832
retrofit: 172

retrofitting incentives: 82
Revitalization: 202, 228, 323,
424
ride sharing: 314
ridership: 685, 791
Right to the City: 622
right-to-know: 123
Rio de Janeiro: 428
risk: 547, 708
risk of falls: 497
risk perception: 83, 136, 441
road conditions: 715
road diet: 710
Road Improvement Program:
351
roads: 544
robotics industry: 44
role-play simulation: 575
role-play simulation exercises:
570
roles of planning and planners:
590
rubble: 399
rule-making: 588
rural: 383, 418, 466
rural comminuty: 461, 686
rural development: 554, 611
rural food policy: 479
rural food security: 479
rural food system: 479
rural infrastructure: 554
rural planning: 359, 490, 611,
658
rural-to-urban migrants: 355
rural-urban water transfer: 120
rurality: 611
rust belt: 171
Rust Belt Region: 893
Saemaul House: 363
Saemaul Village: 363
safe routes to school: 478, 484
safer community: 507
safety: 126, 175, 225, 754, 781,
818, 837
salt water intrusion: 85
SAM multipliers: 61
San Diego: 39
San Francisco: 50
San Jose: 186
scale: 353
scenario-based approach: 19
scholarly: 14

scholarship and society: 608
school: 503
school closure: 299, 306
school district consolidation:
306
school neighborhood: 844
school planning: 732
school siting: 732
school travel: 871
school-shuttered building: 306
schools: 249, 278
sea level rise: 85, 105, 136, 137,
146
Seattle: 106
Seattle Alaskan Way Viaduct:
858
secondary suites: 333
Section 3: 198
Section 319 planning: 122
segregation: 290
seismic hazard: 7
selection: 26
self organizing system: 352
self sufficiency program: 289
self-sufficiency: 281
senior transportation: 700
seniors: 470, 859
sense of community: 349
Seoul Cheong-gye-cheon: 858
sequence analysis: 336
serious games: 570, 575
service delivery: 667
service learning: 530
service providers: 698
service quality: 709
service reliability: 791
service-learning: 377, 535, 848
settlement pattern: 814
sexually oriented businesses:
184
shade policy: 495
Shanghai: 159, 844
Shanghai Songjiang: 424
shared mobility: 718
shared space: 837
sharing city: 129
sharing economy: 129, 287,
303, 314, 827
shoreland area management:
156
short- and long-term effects:
689

shrines: 551
shrinking city: 60, 207, 248,
254, 255, 265, 338, 404, 420
shrinking city: 334
side yards: 207
sidewalks: 901
sign: 874
sign regulation: 522
signage design: 866
signs: 890
SimCity: 517
simultaneous negative
binomial: 702
single-family housing: 234
single-family property values:
273
siting: 572
skateboarding: 774
slow travel: 785
slum clearance: 349
slum upgrading: 385
slums: 388, 395
small community growth and
development: 42
small town: 730
smart city: 25, 129, 637
smart growth: 135, 142, 258,
440, 444, 448, 671, 720
smart growth polices: 223
smart locations: 297
smartphone apps: 696
social accounting matrix: 61
social and cultural equity: 27
social and territorial exclusion:
321
social capital: 270, 514, 867,
869
social change: 252, 402
social cohesion: 528
social cost and benefits: 496
social development: 57
social disparities: 680
social distance: 216
social ecological model: 511
social enterprise: 356
social entrepreneurialsim: 609
social equity: 139, 543, 625,
812
social equity impact: 777
social exclusion: 728, 822, 841
social housing: 428
social inclusion: 184

social influence: 721
social justice: 95, 117, 235, 294,
301, 435, 543, 552, 558, 581,
624
social learning: 563, 601, 634
social marginalization: 645
social media: 11, 146, 175
social metrics: 74
social mobility: 333
social movements: 173, 372,
428, 632, 673
social network analysis: 131
social networks: 352, 721, 741
social policy: 599
social relationship: 165
social sustainability: 184, 203,
288, 617, 888
social urbanism: 386
social vulnerability: 70, 79, 313
social-ecological system: 394
Society of Commanded
Enjoyment: 375
socio-economic  impact: 351
socioeconomic disparity: 671
software: 53
solar energy: 101
solid waste management: 391
Southeast Asia: 401
Southern California: 214
spaces of everyday resistance:
645
Spain: 372
spatial analysis: 37, 237, 280,
461
spatial association: 11
spatial association rules: 845
spatial clustering: 28
spatial correlation: 155
spatial data: 860
spatial dependence models: 15
spatial development: 747
spatial differentiation: 671
spatial distribution: 784
spatial econometrics: 388
spatial econometrics: 331
spatial expression: 127
spatial factors: 157
spatial form: 895
spatial hedonic models: 96
spatial inequality: 490
spatial justice: 173, 599, 652
spatial mismatch: 808

spatial mobility: 316
spatial policy: 655
spatial production and
reproduction: 886
spatial regression models: 144
spatial scale mismatches: 560
spatial statistics: 160
spatial stigma: 338
spatial temporal analysis: 834,
835
spatial typology: 895
spatial variation: 768
special economic zone: 353
special theory: 630
specialization: 50
specializations: 529
sprawl: 135, 140, 436, 448, 483,
760
squatting: 372
staff reports: 564
stakeholder engagement: 122
startups: 30
state and local relations: 558
state housing policy: 326
state intervention: 827
state policy: 654, 664
state regulation: 827
State Street: 879
stated and revealed
preference: 85
stated preference: 776
station area: 758
station-area planning: 821
stigma: 216
stimulating housing
development
storm surge: 85
storm water infrastructure: 893
stormwater: 63, 82
stormwater management: 80,
419
story: 177
storytelling: 69, 609, 612, 760
storytelling in planning: 377
strategic action: 190
strategic  land_use planning: 274
strategies: 108
strategy as practice: 644
stream restoration: 76
street design: 846
street harassment: 175
street space revival: 182

street standards: 797
street trees: 901
street use: 884
street vending: 884
street width: 797
streetcar: 695
streetcar suburbs: 540
strong top-down
implementation: 363
structural equation modeling:
225, 243, 778
student travel: 713
students: 727
studio learning: 531
studio teaching: 523
studios: 530
subprime lending: 295
subsidized housing: 265, 313
substantive theory: 611
suburban: 467
suburbanization: 159
suburbia: 233
suburbs: 172, 430, 456, 853
sunflower movement: 638
superfund sites: 568
supermarket: 464
Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP):
462, 464
survey: 764, 850
sustainable development: 903
sustainability: 69, 74, 94, 95,
114, 117, 128, 129, 135, 181,
210, 328, 419, 585, 625, 679,
860, 883, 888, 894
sustainability indicators: 71
sustainability planning: 23
sustainability policy: 423
sustainable city: 391, 899
sustainable city: 855
sustainable development: 371,
675
sustainable housing market:
191
sustainable lifestyle: 870
sustainable planning: 74
sustainable transportation:
360, 753, 779, 823
sustainable urban design: 856
sustainable urban form: 148
sustainable urbanism: 855
sustainable water use: 19

Suzhou: 437
Sydney: 799
symbols: 890
systematic planning: 127
systems: 480
tax capture authorities: 46
tax increment financing: 46,
273
taxation: 421
taxicabs: 780
taxonomy of signs: 890
teaching: 520
team based learning: 533
technology: 889
Tehran: 628
telecommuting: 738
TELs: 668
TELUM: 7
temporary: 862
temporary  land_uses: 429
temporary urban revitalization:
623
temporary use: 633
tenure security: 388
territoriality: 111
Texas: 119
the built environment: 807
the great recession: 295
the just city: 618
the occupy movement: 638
The Pearl River Delta region:
652
the Philippines: 84, 387
the right to the city: 618
theme: 581
theory: 585, 612, 639
theory and practice: 260
three-dimensional simulation: 8
time: 438, 597, 898
time series models: 15
time use: 236, 690
tipping point: 137
Title VI: 819
TOD: 217, 242, 697, 733, 758,
879
top census tracts: 691
top-down planning: 192
Toronto: 162, 203
total vehicle ownership costs:
788
tourism: 48, 57, 894
town planning schemes: 364

trade-off in environment
quality and economic
efficiency: 649
trade-offs: 124
traditional knowledge: 894
traffic: 710
traffic accidents: 834, 835
traffic calming: 710
traffic congestion: 726
traffic impact analysis: 794
traffic impact assessment: 736
traffic regulations: 774
traffic safety: 702, 703, 716
traffic safety planning: 704
traffic-related air pollution: 12
trails: 826
training: 781
transaction cost economics:
842
transdisciplinarity: 627
transfer of development rights:
432
transferability: 437
transformative planning: 354
transit: 304, 817
transit: 465, 707, 709, 718, 812
transit access: 793
transit capacity: 786
transit demand: 717
transit equity: 824
transit investment: 795, 811
transit oriented development:
304, 442, 736, 761, 784, 777,
806, 809, 832, 838, 843, 867,
879
transit planning: 373, 751
transit premiums: 442
transit ridership: 733, 747
transit service: 731
transit use: 727
transit-oriented development:
176, 214, 283, 687, 751, 771,
773, 812, 821, 880
transit-supportive
neighborhoods: 880
transnational learning: 371
transnationalism: 373
transport: 768
transport exclusion: 766
transport improvements: 836
transport planning: 836, 847
transport policy: 791, 839

transportation: 1, 123, 269,
458, 465, 504, 545, 620, 657,
688, 707, 755, 760, 761, 763,
827, 830, 867
transportation alternatives: 738
transportation and  land_use:
751
transportation costs: 201
transportation demand
management: 803
transportation disadvantages:
698
transportation evaluation: 825
transportation fairness: 571
transportation images: 850
transportation inequality: 728,
822
transportation justice: 696
transportation planning: 7, 15,
569, 591, 593, 672, 711, 802
transportation safety: 845
transportation sustainability:
672
travel: 800
travel attitudes: 756
travel behavior: 236, 283, 302,
440, 685, 699, 700, 706, 707,
721, 752, 778, 803, 805, 815
travel behaviour: 231
travel demographics: 767
travel distance: 727
travel mode: 225
travel options: 727
travel perceptions: 756
travel survey: 775
travel time: 727, 749
tribal planning: 490
trip behavior: 765
trip pattern: 765
Tropical Storm Allison: 91
Turkey: 357
tweet: 11
twitter: 175
two-way: 846
Typhoon Yolanda: 387
U.S.: 695
U.S. planning schools: 518
U.S.-Mexico-border: 556
Uber: 827
uncertainty: 473
unconscious: 596
underserved community: 897

undocumented: 186
uneven development: 22
university travel survey: 727
university-community
partnership: 848
unmet travel needs: 795
upward mobility: 289
urban: 398
urban agriculture: 856
urban change: 417
urban citizenship: 373
urban climate governance: 459
urban coalitions: 389
urban commons: 434
urban complexity: 469
urban conservation: 403
urban containment: 671
urban decentralization: 684
urban decline: 2, 202, 240, 248,
427
urban democracy: 606
urban design: 164, 512, 584,
595, 617, 848, 852, 853, 861,
863, 865, 867, 873, 878, 880,
881, 882, 888, 891, 892, 896,
902
urban design paradigms: 854
urban design plans: 857
urban design practice: 857
urban development: 321, 389,
439
urban development discourse:
635
urban ecology: 78
urban ecosystems: 116
urban energy: 600
urban energy modeling: 21
urban expansion: 451
urban form: 81, 160, 288, 543,
742, 778, 820, 844, 860, 869,
881
urban freight movement: 719
urban from change: 651
urban governance: 239, 499,
539
urban green space: 234, 321
urban growth: 132, 889
urban growth boundary: 426,
437
urban growth machine: 171
urban growth management:
413, 427

urban growth modelling: 19
urban hazards: 714
urban health behavior: 495
urban heat: 872
urban heat island: 6
urban heat islands (UHIs): 65
urban history: 548, 553
urban inequalities: 641
urban informality: 254, 395,
397, 645
urban landscape: 548, 887
urban manufacturing: 56, 647
urban metabolism: 21
urban microclimate: 872
urban models: 841
urban morphology: 543, 892
urban oil wells: 471
urban_planning: 459, 887
urban policy: 357, 389, 900
urban politics: 192, 360, 542,
553
urban public space: 111
urban redevelopment: 192,
229, 250, 282, 623
urban reform: 360
urban regeneration: 202, 240,
403, 427
urban regimes: 48, 553
urban renewal: 61, 422, 545,
858
urban residential
redevelopment project: 294
urban resilience: 90
urban revitalization: 204, 238,
546
urban risk: 161
urban spatial politics: 584
urban sprawl: 142, 413, 427,
501
urban structure: 148
urban sustainability: 101, 106
urban system: 109
urban theory: 222
urban transport: 782
urban upgrading: 381
urban village: 385
urban warfare: 876
urban water: 151
urban-rural divide: 431
urban-rural linkages: 461
urbanism: 886, 899
urbanity: 863

urbanization: 33, 383, 410, 659
US policy: 226
US-Mexico border: 193
usefulness: 5
user fees: 626
utilities: 130
vacancy: 200, 205
vacant land: 2, 207, 420, 576,
893
vacant properties: 197, 315
value: 621
value chains: 485
value of mountain: 325
value orientation: 422
Vancouver: 162
variable pricing: 692
vehicle miles traveled: 794
vehicle miles traveled: 651
vehicle miles traveled (VMT):
772
vehicle travel: 738
vehicle-to-grid: 788
vernacular water system: 110
vertical equity: 345
veterans: 215
vibrant centers: 36
video footage: 1
Vietnam: 384
Virginia: 824
Visual Attention Software: 866
visual communication: 866
visual literacy: 534
visual preference surveys: 85,
850
visual qualities: 863
VMT: 283, 737
VMT reduction: 738
voucher: 269
vulnerability: 105, 126, 139,
504
vulnerability assessment: 384
vulnerable occupation: 656
vulnerable populations: 401
walk: 818
walk score: 680
walkability: 265, 497, 508, 871,
901
walking: 467, 492, 494, 512,
727, 787, 798, 799
walking and biking: 713
walking school bus: 484
walking through walls: 876

walking to school: 680
warehousing: 412
Washington: 722
Washington D.C. Metro: 750
waste management: 118
waste-to-energy: 77, 128
wastewater: 130
wastewater treatment: 397
water: 130, 398
water and sanitation: 674
water attributes: 96
water conservation: 94
water consumption: 140
water pollution: 89
water quality: 122, 143
water resource planning: 98
water reuse: 94
water supply planning: 110

watershed governance: 563
watershed planning: 68, 86
watershed plans: 107
wealth creation: 485
weather extremes: 161
web-survey: 677
welcoming city: 189
welfare reform: 281
well-being: 74, 749, 883
Wellington: 433
wetlands: 113
Wheeler: 646
wildlife refuges: 132
willingness-to-pay: 797
wine: 48
Wisconsin: 113
women: 175
women and planning: 169

women participation: 169
workforce development: 647,
648
working landscapes: 100
writing: 564
Xinjianga Contested city: 376
Yangtze River Delta: 659
Yiftachel: 374
young adults: 676
young people: 115
youth: 503, 673, 781
youth engagement: 647
zero net energy: 101
zoning: 412, 415, 416, 425, 538,
541, 762, 872
zoning history: 414

